    List and hearken, gentlemen,
     That be of free-born blood,
     I shall you tell of a good yeoman,
     His name was Robin Hood.

     Robin was a proud outlaw,
     While as he walked on the ground.
     So courteous an outlaw as he was one
     Was never none else found.

In the days of good King Harry the Second of England--he of the warring
sons--there were certain forests in the north country set aside for the
King’s hunting, and no man might shoot deer therein under penalty of
death. These forests were guarded by the King’s Foresters, the chief
of whom, in each wood, was no mean man but equal in authority to the
Sheriff in his walled town, or even to my lord Bishop in his abbey.

One of the greatest of royal preserves was Sherwood and Barnesdale
forests near the two towns of Nottingham and Barnesdale. Here for some
years dwelt one Hugh Fitzooth as Head Forester, with his good wife and
son Robert. The boy had been born in Lockesley town--in the year 1160,
stern records say--and was often called Lockesley, or Rob of Lockesley.
He was a comely, well-knit stripling, and as soon as he was strong
enough to walk his chief delight was to go with his father into the
forest. As soon as his right arm received thew and sinew he learned to
draw the long bow and speed a true arrow. While on winter evenings his
greatest joy was to hear his father tell of bold Will o’ the Green, the
outlaw, who for many summers defied the King’s Foresters and feasted
with his men upon King’s deer. And on other stormy days the boy learned
to whittle out a straight shaft for the long bow, and tip it with gray
goose feathers.

The fond mother sighed when she saw the boy’s face light up at these
woodland tales. She was of gentle birth, and had hoped to see her son
famous at court or abbey. She taught him to read and to write, to doff
his cap without awkwardness and to answer directly and truthfully both
lord and peasant. But the boy, although he took kindly to these lessons
of breeding, was yet happiest when he had his beloved bow in hand and
strolled at will, listening to the murmur of the trees.

Two playmates had Rob in these gladsome early days. One was Will
Gamewell, his father’s brother’s son, who lived at Gamewell Lodge, hard
by Nottingham town. The other was Marian Fitzwalter, only child of the
Earl of Huntingdon. The castle of Huntingdon could be seen from the top
of one of the tall trees in Sherwood; and on more than one bright day
Rob’s white signal from this tree told Marian that he awaited her there:
for you must know that Rob did not visit her at the castle. His father
and her father were enemies. Some people whispered that Hugh Fitzooth
was the rightful Earl of Huntingdon, but that he had been defrauded out
of his lands by Fitzwalter, who had won the King’s favor by a crusade to
the Holy Land. But little cared Rob or Marian for this enmity, however
it had arisen. They knew that the great green--wood was open to them,
and that the wide, wide world was full of the scent of flowers and the
song of birds.

Days of youth speed all too swiftly, and troubled skies come all too
soon. Rob’s father had two other enemies besides Fitzwalter, in
the persons of the lean Sheriff of Nottingham and the fat Bishop of
Hereford. These three enemies one day got possession of the King’s ear
and whispered therein to such good--or evil--purpose that Hugh Fitzooth
was removed from his post of King’s Forester. He and his wife and Rob,
then a youth of nineteen, were descended upon, during a cold winter’s
evening, and dispossessed without warning. The Sheriff arrested the
Forester for treason--of which, poor man, he was as guiltless as you or
I--and carried him to Nottingham jail. Rob and his mother were sheltered
over night in the jail, also, but next morning were roughly bade to go
about their business. Thereupon they turned for succor to their only
kinsman, Squire George of Gamewell, who sheltered them in all kindness.

But the shock, and the winter night’s journey, proved too much for
Dame Fitzooth. She had not been strong for some time before leaving the
forest. In less than two months she was no more. Rob felt as though his
heart was broken at this loss. But scarcely had the first spring flowers
begun to blossom upon her grave, when he met another crushing blow in
the loss of his father. That stern man had died in prison before his
accusers could agree upon the charges by which he was to be brought to
trial.

Two years passed by. Rob’s cousin Will was away at school; and Marian’s
father, who had learned of her friendship with Rob, had sent his
daughter to the court of Queen Eleanor. So these years were lonely ones
to the orphaned lad. The bluff old Squire was kind to him, but secretly
could make nothing of one who went about brooding and as though seeking
for something he had lost. The truth is that Rob missed his old life
in the forest no less than his mother’s gentleness, and his father’s
companionship. Every time he twanged the string of the long bow against
his shoulder and heard the gray goose shaft sing, it told him of happy
days that he could not recall.

One morning as Rob came in to breakfast, his uncle greeted him with, “I
have news for you, Rob, my lad!” and the hearty old Squire finished his
draught of ale and set his pewter tankard down with a crash.

“What may that be, Uncle Gamewell?” asked the young man.

“Here is a chance to exercise your good long bow and win a pretty prize.
The Fair is on at Nottingham, and the Sheriff proclaims an archer’s
tournament. The best fellows are to have places with the King’s
Foresters, and the one who shoots straightest of all will win for prize
a golden arrow--a useless bauble enough, but just the thing for your lady
love, eh, Rob my boy?” Here the Squire laughed and whacked the table
again with his tankard.

Rob’s eyes sparkled. “‘Twere indeed worth shooting for, uncle mine,” he
said. “I should dearly love to let arrow fly alongside another man. And
a place among the Foresters is what I have long desired. Will you let me
try?”

“To be sure,” rejoined his uncle. “Well I know that your good mother
would have had me make a clerk of you; but well I see that the greenwood
is where you will pass your days. So, here’s luck to you in the bout!”
 And the huge tankard came a third time into play.

The young man thanked his uncle for his good wishes, and set about
making preparations for the journey. He traveled lightly; but his yew
bow must needs have a new string, and his cloth-yard arrows must be of
the straightest and soundest.

One fine morning, a few days after, Rob might have been seen passing
by way of Lockesley through Sherwood Forest to Nottingham town. Briskly
walked he and gaily, for his hopes were high and never an enemy had he
in the wide world. But ‘twas the very last morning in all his life
when he was to lack an enemy! For, as he went his way through Sherwood,
whistling a blithe tune, he came suddenly upon a group of Foresters,
making merry beneath the spreading branches of an oak-tree. They had a
huge meat pie before them and were washing down prodigious slices of it
with nut brown ale.

One glance at the leader and Rob knew at once that he had found
an enemy. ‘Twas the man who had usurped his father’s place as Head
Forester, and who had roughly turned his mother out in the snow. But
never a word said he for good or bad, and would have passed on his way,
had not this man, clearing his throat with a huge gulp, bellowed out:
“By my troth, here is a pretty little archer! Where go you, my lad, with
that tupenny bow and toy arrows? Belike he would shoot at Nottingham
Fair! Ho! Ho!”

A roar of laughter greeted this sally. Rob flushed, for he was mightily
proud of his shooting.

“My bow is as good as yours,” he retorted, “and my shafts will carry as
straight and as far. So I’ll not take lessons of any of ye.”

They laughed again loudly at this, and the leader said with frown:

“Show us some of your skill, and if you can hit the mark here’s twenty
silver pennies for you. But if you hit it not you are in for a sound
drubbing for your pertness.”

“Pick your own target,” quoth Rob in a fine rage. “I’ll lay my head
against that purse that I can hit it.”

“It shall be as you say,” retorted the Forester angrily, “your head for
your sauciness that you hit not my target.”

Now at a little rise in the wood a herd of deer came grazing by, distant
full fivescore yards. They were King’s deer, but at that distance seemed
safe from any harm. The Head Forester pointed to them.

“If your young arm could speed a shaft for half that distance, I’d shoot
with you.”

“Done!” cried Rob. “My head against twenty pennies I’ll cause yon fine
fellow in the lead of them to breathe his last.”

And without more ado he tried the string of his long bow, placed a shaft
thereon, and drew it to his ear. A moment, and the quivering string sang
death as the shaft whistled across the glade. Another moment and the
leader of the herd leaped high in his tracks and fell prone, dyeing the
sward with his heart’s blood.

A murmur of amazement swept through the Foresters, and then a growl of
rage. He that had wagered was angriest of all.

“Know you what you have done, rash youth?” he said. “You have killed a
King’s deer, and by the laws of King Harry your head remains forfeit.
Talk not to me of pennies but get ye gone straight, and let me not look
upon your face again.”

Rob’s blood boiled within him, and he uttered a rash speech. “I have
looked upon your face once too often already, my fine Forester. ‘Tis you
who wear my father’s shoes.”

And with this he turned upon his heel and strode away.

The Forester heard his parting thrust with an oath. Red with rage he
seized his bow, strung an arrow, and without warning launched it full
af’ Rob. Well was it for the latter that the Forester’s foot turned on a
twig at the critical instant, for as it was the arrow whizzed by his ear
so close as to take a stray strand of his hair with it. Rob turned upon
his assailant, now twoscore yards away.

“Ha!” said he. “You shoot not so straight as I, for all your bravado.
Take this from the tupenny bow!”

Straight flew his answering shaft. The Head Forester gave one cry, then
fell face downward and lay still. His life had avenged Rob’s father, but
the son was outlawed. Forward he ran through the forest, before the
band could gather their scattered wits--still forward into the great
greenwood. The swaying trees seemed to open their arms to the wanderer,
and to welcome him home.

Toward the close of the same day, Rob paused hungry and weary at the
cottage of a poor widow who dwelt upon the outskirts of the forest. Now
this widow had often greeted him kindly in his boyhood days, giving him
to eat and drink. So he boldly entered her door. The old dame was right
glad to see him, and baked him cakes in the ashes, and had him rest and
tell her his story. Then she shook her head.

“‘Tis an evil wind that blows through Sherwood,” she said. “The poor are
despoiled and the rich ride over their bodies. My three sons have been
outlawed for shooting King’s deer to keep us from starving, and now hide
in the wood. And they tell me that twoscore of as good men as ever drew
bow are in hiding with them.”

“Where are they, good mother?” cried Rob. “By my faith, I will join
them.”

“Nay, nay,” replied the old woman at first. But when she saw that there
was no other way, she said: “My sons will visit me to-night. Stay you
here and see them if you must.”

So Rob stayed willingly to see the widow’s sons that night, for they
were men after his own heart. And when they found that his mood was with
them, they made him swear an oath of fealty, and told him the haunt of
the band--a place he knew right well. Finally one of them said:

“But the band lacks a leader--one who can use his head as well as
his hand. So we have agreed that he who has skill enough to go to
Nottingham, an outlaw, and win the prize at archery, shall be our
chief.”

Rob sprang to his feet. “Said in good time!” cried he, “for I had
started to that self-same Fair, and all the Foresters, and all the
Sheriff’s men in Christendom shall not stand between me and the center
of their target!”

And though he was but barely grown he stood so straight and his eye
flashed with such fire that the three brothers seized his hand and
shouted:

“A Lockesley! a Lockesley! if you win the golden arrow you shall be
chief of outlaws in Sherwood Forest!”

So Rob fell to planning how he could disguise himself to go to
Nottingham town; for he knew that the Foresters had even then set a
price on his head in the market-place.

It was even as Rob had surmised. The Sheriff of Nottingham posted a
reward of two hundred pounds for the capture, dead or alive, of one
Robert Fitzooth, outlaw. And the crowds thronging the streets upon that
busy Fair day often paused to read the notice and talk together about
the death of the Head Forester.

But what with wrestling bouts and bouts with quarter-staves, and
wandering minstrels, there came up so many other things to talk about,
that the reward was forgotten for the nonce, and only the Foresters
and Sheriff’s men watched the gates with diligence, the Sheriff indeed
spurring them to effort by offers of largess. His hatred of the father
had descended to the son.

The great event of the day came in the afternoon. It was the archer’s
contest for the golden arrow, and twenty men stepped forth to shoot.
Among them was a beggar-man, a sorry looking fellow with leggings of
different colors, and brown scratched face and hands. Over a tawny shock
of hair he had a hood drawn, much like that of a monk. Slowly he limped
to his place in the line, while the mob shouted in derision. But the
contest was open to all comers, so no man said him nay.

Side by side with Rob--for it was he--stood a muscular fellow of swarthy
visage and with one eye hid by a green bandage. Him also the crowd
jeered, but he passed them by with indifference while he tried his bow
with practiced hand.

A great crowd had assembled in the amphitheater enclosing the lists. All
the gentry and populace of the surrounding country were gathered there
in eager expectancy. The central box contained the lean but pompous
Sheriff, his bejeweled wife, and their daughter, a supercilious young
woman enough, who, it was openly hinted, was hoping to receive the
golden arrow from the victor and thus be crowned queen of the day.

Next to the Sheriff’s box was one occupied by the fat Bishop of
Hereford; while in the other side was a box wherein sat a girl whose
dark hair, dark eyes, and fair features caused Rob’s heart to leap.
‘Twas Maid Marian! She had come up for a visit from the Queen’s court at
London town, and now sat demurely by her father the Earl of Huntingdon.
If Rob had been grimly resolved to win the arrow before, the sight of
her sweet face multiplied his determination an hundredfold. He felt his
muscles tightening into bands of steel, tense and true. Yet withal his
heart would throb, making him quake in a most unaccountable way.

Then the trumpet sounded, and the crowd became silent while the herald
announced the terms of the contest. The lists were open to all comers.
The first target was to be placed at thirty ells distance, and all those
who hit its center were allowed to shoot at the second target, placed
ten ells farther off. The third target was to be removed yet farther,
until the winner was proved. The winner was to receive the golden arrow,
and a place with the King’s Foresters. He it was also who crowned the
queen of the day.

The trumpet sounded again, and the archers prepared to shoot. Rob looked
to his string, while the crowd smiled and whispered at the odd figure
he cut, with his vari-colored legs and little cape. But as the first man
shot, they grew silent.

The target was not so far but that twelve out of the twenty contestants
reached its inner circle. Rob shot sixth in the line and landed fairly,
being rewarded by an approving grunt from the man with the green
blinder, who shot seventh, and with apparent carelessness, yet true to
the bull’s-eye.

The mob cheered and yelled themselves hoarse at this even marksmanship.
The trumpet sounded again, and a new target was set up at forty ells.

The first three archers again struck true, amid the loud applause of the
onlookers; for they were general favorites and expected to win. Indeed
‘twas whispered that each was backed by one of the three dignitaries
of the day. The fourth and fifth archers barely grazed the center. Rob
fitted his arrow quietly and with some confidence sped it unerringly
toward the shining circle.

“The beggar! the beggar!” yelled the crowd; “another bull for the
beggar!” In truth his shaft was nearer the center than any of the
others. But it was not so near that “Blinder,” as the mob had promptly
christened his neighbor, did not place his shaft just within the mark.
Again the crowd cheered wildly. Such shooting as this was not seen every
day in Nottingham town.

The other archers in this round were disconcerted by the preceding
shots, or unable to keep the pace. They missed one after another and
dropped moodily back, while the trumpet sounded for the third round, and
the target was set up fifty ells distant.

“By my halidom you draw a good bow, young master,” said Rob’s queer
comrade to him in the interval allowed for rest. “Do you wish me to
shoot first on this trial?”

“Nay,” said Rob, “but you are a good fellow by this token, and if I win
not, I hope you may keep the prize from yon strutters.” And he nodded
scornfully to the three other archers who were surrounded by their
admirers, and were being made much of by retainers of the Sheriff, the
Bishop, and the Earl. From them his eye wandered toward Maid Marian’s
booth. She had been watching him, it seemed, for their eyes met; then
hers were hastily averted.

“Blinder’s” quick eye followed those of Rob. “A fair maid, that,” he
said smilingly, “and one more worthy the golden arrow than the Sheriff’s
haughty miss.”

Rob looked at him swiftly, and saw naught but kindliness in his glance.

“You are a shrewd fellow and I like you well,” was his only comment.

Now the archers prepared to shoot again, each with some little care. The
target seemed hardly larger than the inner ring had looked, at the first
trial. The first three sped their shafts, and while they were fair shots
they did not more than graze the inner circle.

Rob took his stand with some misgiving. Some flecking clouds overhead
made the light uncertain, and a handful of wind frolicked across the
range in a way quite disturbing to a bowman’s nerves. His eyes wandered
for a brief moment to the box wherein sat the dark-eyed girl. His heart
leaped! she met his glance and smiled at him reassuringly. And in that
moment he felt that she knew him despite his disguise and looked to him
to keep the honor of old Sherwood. He drew his bow firmly and, taking
advantage of a momentary lull in the breeze, launched the arrow straight
and true-singing across the range to the center of the target.

“The beggar! the beggar! a bull! a bull!” yelled the fickle mob,
who from jeering him were now his warm friends. “Can you beat that,
Blinder?”

The last archer smiled scornfully and made ready. He drew his bow with
ease and grace and, without seeming to study the course, released the
winged arrow. Forward it leaped toward the target, and all eyes followed
its flight. A loud uproar broke forth when it alighted, just without the
center and grazing the shaft sent by Rob. The stranger made a gesture
of surprise when his own eyes announced the result to him, but saw his
error. He had not allowed for the fickle gust of wind which seized the
arrow and carried it to one side. But for all that he was the first to
congratulate the victor.

“I hope we may shoot again,” quoth he. “In truth I care not for the
golden bauble and wished to win it in despite of the Sheriff for whom I
have no love. Now crown the lady of your choice.” And turning suddenly
he was lost in the crowd, before Rob could utter what it was upon his
lips to say, that he would shoot again with him.

And now the herald summoned Rob to the Sheriff’s box to receive the
prize.

“You are a curious fellow enough,” said the Sheriff, biting his lip
coldly; “yet you shoot well. What name go you by?”

Marian sat near and was listening intently.

“I am called Rob the Stroller, my Lord Sheriff,” said the archer.

Marian leaned back and smiled.

“Well, Rob the Stroller, with a little attention to your skin and
clothes you would not be so bad a man,” said the Sheriff. “How like you
the idea of entering my service.

“Rob the Stroller has ever been a free man, my Lord, and desires no
service.”

The Sheriff’s brow darkened, yet for the sake of his daughter and the
golden arrow, he dissembled.

“Rob the Stroller,” said he, “here is the golden arrow which has been
offered to the best of archers this day. You are awarded the prize. See
that you bestow it worthily.”

At this point the herald nudged Rob and half inclined his head toward
the Sheriff’s daughter, who sat with a thin smile upon her lips. But Rob
heeded him not. He took the arrow and strode to the next box where sat
Maid Marian.

“Lady,” he said, “pray accept this little pledge from a poor stroller
who would devote the best shafts in his quiver to serve you.”

“My thanks to you, Rob in the Hood,” replied she with a roguish twinkle
in her eye; and she placed the gleaming arrow in her hair, while the
people shouted, “The Queen! the Queen!”

The Sheriff glowered furiously upon this ragged archer who had refused
his service, taken his prize without a word of thanks, and snubbed his
daughter. He would have spoken, but his proud daughter restrained him.
He called to his guard and bade them watch the beggar. But Rob had
already turned swiftly, lost himself in the throng, and headed straight
for the town gate.

That same evening within a forest glade a group of men--some twoscore
clad in Lincoln green--sat round a fire roasting venison and making
merry. Suddenly a twig crackled and they sprang to their feet and seized
their weapons.

“I look for the widow’s sons,” a clear voice said, “and I come alone.”

Instantly the three men stepped forward.

“Tis Rob!” they cried; “welcome to Sherwood Forest, Rob!” And all the
men came and greeted him; for they had heard his story.

Then one of the widow’s sons, Stout Will, stepped forth and said:

“Comrades all, ye know that our band has sadly lacked a leader--one of
birth, breeding, and skill. Belike we have found that leader in this
young man. And I and my brothers have told him that the band would
choose that one who should bring the Sheriff to shame this day and
capture his golden arrow. Is it not so?”

The band gave assent.

Will turned to Rob. “What news bring you from Nottingham town?” asked
he.

Rob laughed. “In truth I brought the Sheriff to shame for mine own
pleasure, and won his golden arrow to boot. But as to the prize ye must
e’en take my word, for I bestowed it upon a maid.”

And seeing the men stood in doubt at this, he continued: “But I’ll
gladly join your band, and you take me, as a common archer. For there
are others older and mayhap more skilled than I.”

Then stepped one forward from the rest, a tall swarthy man. And Rob
recognized him as the man with the green blinder; only this was now
removed, and his freed eye gleamed as stoutly as the other one.

“Rob in the Hood--for such the lady called you,” said he, “I can vouch
for your tale. You shamed the Sheriff e’en as I had hoped to do; and we
can forego the golden arrow since it is in such fair hands. As to your
shooting and mine, we must let future days decide. But here I, Will
Stutely, declare that I will serve none other chief save only you.”

Then good Will Stutely told the outlaws of Rob’s deeds, and gave him his
hand of fealty. And the widow’s sons did likewise, and the other members
every one, right gladly; because Will Stutely had heretofore been the
truest bow in all the company. And they toasted him in nut brown ale,
and hailed him as their leader, by the name of Robin Hood. And he
accepted that name because Maid Marian had said it.

By the light of the camp-fire the band exchanged signs and passwords.
They gave Robin Hood a horn upon which he was to blow to summon them.
They swore, also, that while they might take money and goods from the
unjust rich, they would aid and befriend the poor and the helpless; and
that they would harm no woman, be she maid, wife, or widow. They swore
all this with solemn oaths, while they feasted about the ruddy blaze,
under the greenwood tree.

And that is how Robin Hood became an outlaw.




CHAPTER II

HOW ROBIN HOOD MET LITTLE JOHN

     “O here is my hand,” the stranger reply’d,
     “I’ll serve you with all my whole heart.
     My name is John Little, a man of good mettle,
     Ne’er doubt me for I’ll play my part.”

     “His name shall be altered,” quoth William Stutely,
     “And I will his godfather be:
     Prepare then a feast, and none of the least,
     For we will be merry,” quoth he.

All that summer Robin Hood and his merry men roamed in Sherwood Forest,
and the fame of their deeds ran abroad in the land. The Sheriff of
Nottingham waxed wroth at the report, but all his traps and excursions
failed to catch the outlaws. The poor people began by fearing them, but
when they found that the men in Lincoln green who answered Robin Hood’s
horn meant them no harm, but despoiled the oppressor to relieve the
oppressed, they ‘gan to have great liking for them. And the band
increased by other stout hearts till by the end of the summer fourscore
good men and true had sworn fealty.

But the days of quiet which came on grew irksome to Robin’s adventurous
spirit. Up rose he, one gay morn, and slung his quiver over his
shoulders.

“This fresh breeze stirs the blood, my lads,” quoth he, “and I would
be seeing what the gay world looks like in the direction of Nottingham
town. But tarry ye behind in the borders of the forest, within earshot
of my bugle call.”

Thus saying he strode merrily forward to the edge of the wood, and
paused there a moment, his agile form erect, his brown locks flowing
and his brown eyes watching the road; and a goodly sight he made, as the
wind blew the ruddy color into his cheeks.

The highway led clear in the direction of the town, and thither he
boldly directed his steps. But at a bend in the road he knew of a
by-path leading across a brook which made the way nearer and less open,
into which he turned. As he approached the stream he saw that it had
become swollen by recent rains into quite a pretty torrent. The log
foot-bridge was still there, but at this end of it a puddle intervened
which could be crossed only with a leap, if you would not get your feet
wet.

But Robin cared little for such a handicap. Taking a running start, his
nimble legs carried him easily over and balanced neatly upon the end of
the broad log. But he was no sooner started across than he saw a tall
stranger coming from the other side. Thereupon Robin quickened his pace,
and the stranger did likewise, each thinking to cross first. Midway they
met, and neither would yield an inch.

“Give way, fellow!” roared Robin, whose leadership of a band, I am
afraid, had not tended to mend his manners.

The stranger smiled. He was almost a head taller than the other.

“Nay,” he retorted, “fair and softly! I give way only to a better man
than myself.”

“Give way, I say”, repeated Robin, “or I shall have to show you a better
man.”

His opponent budged not an inch, but laughed loudly. “Now by my
halidom!” he said good-naturedly, “I would not move after hearing that
speech, even if minded to it before; for this better man I have sought
my life long. Therefore show him to me, an it please you.”

“That will I right soon,” quoth Robin. “Stay you here a little while,
till I cut me a cudgel like unto that you have been twiddling in your
fingers.” So saying he sought his own bank again with a leap, laid aside
his long bow and arrows, and cut him a stout staff of oak, straight,
knotless, and a good six feet in length. But still it was a full foot
shorter than his opponent’s. Then back came he boldly.

“I mind not telling you, fellow,” said he, “that a bout with archery
would have been an easier way with me. But there are other tunes in
England besides that the arrow sings.” Here he whirred the staff about
his head by way of practice. “So make you ready for the tune I am about
to play upon your ribs. Have at you! One, two--”

“Three!” roared the giant smiting at him instantly.

Well was it for Robin that he was quick and nimble of foot; for the blow
that grazed a hair’s breadth from his shoulder would have felled an ox.
Nevertheless while swerving to avoid this stroke, Robin was poising for
his own, and back came he forthwith--whack!

Whack! parried the other.

Whack! whack! whack! whack!

The fight waxed fast and furious. It was strength pitted against
subtlety, and the match was a merry one. The mighty blows of the
stranger went whistling around Robin’s ducking head, while his own swift
undercuts were fain to give the other an attack of indigestion. Yet each
stood firmly in his place not moving backward or forward a foot for a
good half hour, nor thinking of crying “Enough!” though some chance blow
seemed likely to knock one or the other off the narrow foot-bridge. The
giant’s face was getting red, and his breath came snorting forth like
a bull’s. He stepped forward with a furious onslaught to finish this
audacious fellow. Robin dodged his blows lightly, then sprang in swiftly
and unexpectedly and dealt the stranger such a blow upon the short ribs
that you would have sworn the tanner was trimming down his hides for
market.

The stranger reeled and came within an ace of falling, but regained his
footing right quickly.

“By my life, you can hit hard!” he gasped forth, giving back a blow
almost while he was yet staggering.

This blow was a lucky one. It caught Robin off his guard. His stick had
rested a moment while he looked to see the giant topple into the water,
when down came the other upon his head, whack! Robin saw more stars
in that one moment than all the astronomers have since discovered, and
forthwith he dropped neatly into the stream.

The cool rushing current quickly brought him to his senses, howbeit he
was still so dazed that he groped blindly for the swaying reeds to
pull himself up on the bank. His assailant could not forbear laughing
heartily at his plight, but was also quick to lend his aid. He thrust
down his long staff to Robin crying, “Lay hold of that, an your fists
whirl not so much as your head!”

Robin laid hold and was hauled to dry land for all the world like
a fish, except that the fish would never have come forth so wet and
dripping. He lay upon the warm bank for a space to regain his senses.
Then he sat up and gravely rubbed his pate.

“By all the saints!” said he, “you hit full stoutly. My head hums like a
hive of bees on a summer morning.”

Then he seized his horn, which lay near, and blew thereon three shrill
notes that echoed against the trees. A moment of silence ensued, and
then was heard the rustling of leaves and crackling of twigs like the
coming of many men; and forth from the glade burst a score or two of
stalwart yeomen, all clad in Lincoln green, like Robin, with good Will
Stutely and the widow’s three sons at their head.

“Good master,” cried Will Stutely, “how is this? In sooth there is not a
dry thread on your body.”

“Why, marry,” replied Robin, “this fellow would not let me pass the
footbridge, and when I tickled him in the ribs, he must needs answer by
a pat on the head which landed me overboard.”

“Then shall he taste some of his own porridge,” quoth Will. “Seize him,
lads!”

“Nay, let him go free,” said Robin. “The fight was a fair one and I
abide by it. I surmise you also are quits?” he continued, turning to the
stranger with a twinkling eye.

“I am content,” said the other, “for verily you now have the best end of
the cudgel. Wherefore, I like you well, and would fain know your name.”

“Why,” said Robin, “my men and even the Sheriff of Nottingham know me as
Robin Hood, the outlaw.”

“Then am I right sorry that I beat you,” exclaimed the man, “for I was
on my way to seek you and to try to join your merry company. But after
my unmannerly use of the cudgel, I fear we are still strangers.”

“Nay, never say it!” cried Robin, “I am glad I fell in with you; though,
sooth to say, I did all the falling!”

And amid a general laugh the two men clasped hands, and in that clasp
the strong friendship of a lifetime was begun.

“But you have not yet told us your name,” said Robin, bethinking
himself.

“Whence I came, men call me John Little.”

“Enter our company then, John Little; enter and welcome. The rites are
few, the fee is large. We ask your whole mind and body and heart even
unto death.”

“I give the bond, upon my life,” said the tall man.

Thereupon Will Stutely, who loved a good jest, spoke up and said: “The
infant in our household must be christened, and I’ll stand godfather.
This fair little stranger is so small of bone and sinew, that his old
name is not to the purpose.” Here he paused long enough to fill a horn
in the stream. “Hark ye, my son,”--standing on tiptoe to splash the
water on the giant--“take your new name on entering the forest. I
christen you Little John.”

At this jest the men roared long and loud.

“Give him a bow, and find a full sheath of arrows for Little John,”
 said Robin joyfully. “Can you shoot as well as fence with the staff, my
friend?”

“I have hit an ash twig at forty yards,” said Little John.

Thus chatting pleasantly the band turned back into the woodland and
sought their secluded dell, where the trees were the thickest, the moss
was the softest, and a secret path led to a cave, at once a retreat and
a stronghold. Here under a mighty oak they found the rest of the band,
some of whom had come in with a brace of fat does. And here they built
a ruddy fire and sat down to the meat and ale, Robin Hood in the center
with Will Stutely on the one hand and Little John on the other. And
Robin was right well pleased with the day’s adventure, even though he
had got a drubbing; for sore ribs and heads will heal, and ‘tis not
every day that one can find a recruit as stout of bone and true of soul
as Little John.




CHAPTER III

HOW ROBIN HOOD TURNED BUTCHER, AND ENTERED THE SHERIFF’S SERVICE

     The butcher he answered jolly Robin,
     “No matter where I do dwell,
     For a butcher am I, and to Nottingham
     Am I going, my flesh to sell.”

The next morning the weather had turned ill, and Robin Hood’s band
stayed close to their dry and friendly cave. The third day brought a
diversion in the shape of a trap by a roving party of the Sheriff’s men.
A fine stag had been struck down by one Of Will Stutely’s fellows, and
he and others had stepped forth from the covert to seize it, when twenty
bowmen from Nottingham appeared at the end of the glade. Down dropped
Will’s men on all fours, barely in time to hear a shower of arrows
whistle above their heads. Then from behind the friendly trees they
sent back such a welcome that the Sheriff’s men deemed it prudent not to
tarry in their steps. Two of them, in sooth, bore back unpleasant wounds
in their shoulders, from the encounter.

When they returned to town the Sheriff waxed red with rage.

“What,” he gasped, “do my men fear to fight this Robin Hood, face to
face? Would that I could get him within my reach, once. We should see
then; we should see!”

What it was the Sheriff would see, he did not state. But he was to have
his wish granted in short space, and you and I will see how he profited
by it.

The fourth day and the one following this friendly bout, Little John was
missing. One of his men said that he saw him talking with a beggar, but
did not know whither they had gone. Two more days passed. Robin grew
uneasy. He did not doubt the faith of Little John, but he was fearful
lest a roving band of Foresters had captured him.

At last Robin could not remain quiet. Up sprang he, with bow and arrows,
and a short sword at his side.

“I must away to Nottingham town, my men,” he cried. “The goodly Sheriff
has long desired to see me; and mayhap he can tell me tidings of the
best quarter-staff in the shire”--meaning Little John.

Others of the band besought him to let them go with him, but he would
not.

“Nay,” he said smilingly, “the Sheriff and I are too good friends to put
doubt upon our meeting. But tarry ye in the edge of the wood opposite
the west gate of the town, and ye may be of service ere to-morrow
night.”

So saying he strode forward to the road leading to Nottingham, and stood
as before looking up and down to see if the way was clear. Back at a
bend in the road he heard a rumbling and a lumbering, when up drove
a stout butcher, whistling gaily, and driving a mare that sped slowly
enough because of the weight of meat with which the cart was loaded.

“A good morrow to you, friend,” hailed Robin. “Whence come you and where
go you with your load of meat?”

“A good morrow to you,” returned the butcher, civilly enough. “No matter
where I dwell. I am but a simple butcher, and to Nottingham am I going,
my flesh to sell. ‘Tis Fair week, and my beef and mutton should fetch a
fair penny,” and he laughed loudly at his jest. “But whence come you?”

“A yeoman am I, from Lockesley town. Men call me Robin Hood.”

“The saints forefend that you should treat me ill!” said the butcher in
terror. “Oft have I heard of you, and how you lighten the purses of the
fat priests and knights. But I am naught but a poor butcher, selling
this load of meat, perchance, for enough to pay my quarter’s rent.”

“Rest you, my friend, rest you,” quoth Robin, “not so much as a silver
penny would I take from you, for I love an honest Saxon face and a fair
name with my neighbors. But I would strike a bargain with you.”

Here he took from his girdle a well-filled purse, and continued, “I
would fain be a butcher, this day, and sell meat at Nottingham town.
Could you sell me your meat, your cart, your mare, and your good-will,
without loss, for five marks?”

“Heaven bless ye, good Robin,” cried the butcher right joyfully, “that
can I!” And he leaped down forthwith from the cart, and handed Robin the
reins in exchange for the purse.

“One moment more,” laughed Robin, “we must e’en change garments for the
nonce. Take mine and scurry home quickly lest the King’s Foresters try
to put a hole through this Lincoln green.”

So saying he donned the butcher’s blouse and apron, and, climbing into
the cart, drove merrily down the road to the town.

When he came to Nottingham he greeted the scowling gate-keeper blithely
and proceeded to the market-place. Boldly he led his shuffling horse to
the place where the butchers had their stalls.

He had no notion of the price to ask for his meat, but put on a foolish
and simple air as he called aloud his wares:

     “Hark ye, lasses and dames, hark ye,
     Good meat come buy, come buy,
     Three pen’orths go for one penny,
     And a kiss is good, say I!”

Now when the folk found what a simple butcher he was, they crowded
around his cart; for he really did sell three times as much for one
penny as was sold by the other butchers. And one or two serving-lasses
with twinkling eyes liked his comely face so well that they willingly
gave boot of a kiss.

But the other butchers were wroth when they found how he was taking
their trade; and they accordingly put their heads together.

One said, “He is a prodigal and has sold his father’s land, and this is
his first venture in trading.”

Another said, “He is a thief who has murdered a butcher, and stolen his
horse and meat.”

Robin heard these sayings, but only laughed merrily and sang his song
the louder. His good-humor made the people laugh also and crowd round
his cart closely, shouting uproariously when some buxom lass submitted
to be kissed.

Then the butchers saw that they must meet craft with craft; and they
said to him, “Come, brother butcher, if you would sell meat with us, you
must e’en join our guild and stand by the rules of our trade.”

“We dine at the Sheriff’s mansion to-day,” said another, “and you must
take one of our party.”

     “Accurst of his heart,” said jolly Robin,
     “That a butcher will deny.
     I’ll go with you, my brethren true,
     And as fast as I can hie.”

Whereupon, having sold all his meat, he left his horse and cart in
charge of a friendly hostler and prepared to follow his mates to the
Mansion House.

It was the Sheriff’s custom to dine various guilds of the trade, from
time to time, on Fair days, for he got a pretty profit out of the fees
they paid him for the right to trade in the market-place. The Sheriff
was already come with great pomp into the banqueting room, when Robin
Hood and three or four butchers entered, and he greeted them all with
great condescension; and presently the whole of a large company was
seated at a table groaning beneath the good cheer of the feast.

Now the Sheriff bade Robin sit by his right hand, at the head of the
board; for one or two butchers had whispered to the official, “That
fellow is a right mad blade, who yet made us much sport to-day. He sold
more meat for one penny than we could sell for three; and he gave extra
weight to whatsoever lass would buss him.” And others said, “He is
some prodigal who knows not the value of goods, and may be plucked by a
shrewd man right closely.”

The Sheriff was will to pluck a prodigal with the next man, and he was
moreover glad to have a guest who promised to enliven the feast. So, as
I have told you, he placed Robin by his side, and he made much of him
and laughed boisterously at his jests; though sooth to say, the laugh
were come by easily, for Robin had never been in merrier mood, and his
quips and jests soon put the whole table at a roar.

Then my lord Bishop of Hereford came in, last of all, to say a ponderous
grace and take his seat on the other side of the Sheriff--the prelate’s
fat body showing up in goodly contrast to the other’s lean bones.

After grace was said, and while the servants clattered in with the meat
platters, Robin stood up and said:

“An amen say I to my lord Bishop’s thanks! How, now, my fine fellows, be
merry and drink deep; for the shot I’ll pay ere I go my way, though it
cost me five pounds and more. So my lords and gentlemen all, spare not
the wine, but fall to lustily.”

“Hear! hear!” shouted the butchers.

“Now are you a right jolly soul,” quoth the Sheriff, “but this feast is
mine own. Howbeit you must have many a head of horned beasts, and many
an acre of broad land, to spend from your purse so freely.”

“Aye, that have I,” returned Robin, his eyes all a twinkle, “five
hundred horned beasts have I and my brothers, and none of them have we
been able to sell. That is why I have turned butcher. But I know not the
trade, and would gladly sell the whole herd, an I could find a buyer.”

At this, the Sheriff’s greed ‘gan to rise. Since this fool _would_ be
plucked, thought he, why should not he do the plucking?

“Five hundred beasts, say you?” he queried sharply.

“Five hundred and ten fat beasts by actual count, that I would sell for
a just figure. Aye, to him who will pay me in right money, would I sell
them for twenty pieces of gold. Is that too much to ask, lording?”

Was there ever such an idiot butcher? thought the Sheriff; and he so far
forgot his dignity as to nudge the Bishop in his fat ribs.

“Nay, good fellow,” quoth he chuckling, “I am always ready to help
any in my shire. An you cannot find a buyer for your herd at this just
figure, I will e’en buy them myself.”

At this generosity Robin was quite overcome, and fell to praising the
Sheriff to the skies, and telling him that he should not have cause to
forget the kindness.

“Tut, tut,” said the Sheriff, “‘tis naught but a trade. Drive in your
herd tomorrow to the market-place and you shall have money down.”

“Nay, excellence,” said Robin, “that can I not easily do, for they are
grazing in scattered fashion. But they are over near Gamewell, not more
than a mile therefrom at most. Will you not come and choose your own
beasts tomorrow?”

“Aye, that I will,” said the Sheriff, his cupidity casting his caution
to the winds. “Tarry with me over night, and I will go with you in the
morning.”

This was a poser for Robin, since he liked not the idea of staying over
night at the Sheriff’s house. He had hoped to appoint a meeting-place
for the other, but now saw that this might excite doubt. He looked
around at the company. By this time, you must know, the feast had
progressed far, and the butchers were deep in their cups. The Sheriff
and Robin had talked in a low voice, and my lord Bishop was almost
asleep.

“Agreed,” said Robin presently, and the words were no sooner out of his
mouth than the door opened and a serving-man entered bearing tray of
mulled wine. At sight of the fellow’s face, Robin gave an involuntary
start of surprise which was instantly checked. The other also saw him,
stood still a moment, and as if forgetting something turned about and
left the hall.

It was Little John.

A dozen questions flashed across Robin’s mind, and he could find answer
for none of them. What was Little John doing in the Sheriff’s house? Why
had he not told the band? Was he true to them? Would he betray him?

But these questions of distrust were dismissed from Robin’s open mind
as soon as they had entered. He knew that Little John was faithful and
true.

He recovered his spirits and began again upon a vein of foolish banter,
for the amusement of the Sheriff and his guests, all being now merry
with wine.

“A song!” one of them shouted, and the cry was taken up round the table.
Robin mounted his chair and trolled forth:

     “A lass and a butcher of Nottingham
     Agreed ‘twixt them for to wed.
     Says he, ‘I’ll give ye the meat, fair dame,
     And ye will give me the bread.”

Then they joined in the chorus amid a pounding of cups upon the board:

     “With a hey and a ho
     And a hey nonny no,
     A butcher of Nottingham!”

While the song was at its height, Little John reappeared, with other
servants, and refilled the cups. He came up to Robin and, as if asking
him if he would have more wine, said softly, “Meet me in the pantry
to-night.”

Robin nodded, and sang loudly. The day was already far spent, and
presently the company broke up with many hiccupy bows of the Sheriff and
little notice of the drowsy Bishop.

When the company was dispersed, the Sheriff bade a servant show Robin to
his room, and promised to see him at breakfast the next day.

Robin kept his word and met Little John that night, and the sheriff next
day; but Little John has been doing so much in the meantime that he must
be allowed a chapter to himself.

So let us turn to another story that was sung of, in the ballads of
olden time, and find out how Little John entered the Sheriff’s service.




CHAPTER IV

HOW LITTLE JOHN ENTERED THE SHERIFF’S SERVICE

     List and hearken, gentlemen,
     All ye that now be here,
     Of Little John, that was Knight’s-man,
     Good mirth ye now shall hear.

It had come around another Fair day at Nottingham town, and folk crowded
there by all the gates. Goods of many kinds were displayed in gaily
colored booths, and at every cross-street a free show was in progress.
Here and there, stages had been erected for the play at quarter-staff, a
highly popular sport.

There was a fellow, one Eric of Lincoln, who was thought to be the
finest man with the staff for miles around. His feats were sung about in
ballads through all the shire. A great boaster was he withal, and to-day
he strutted about on one of these corner stages, and vaunted of his
prowess, and offered to crack any man’s crown for a shilling. Several
had tried their skill with Eric, but he had soon sent them spinning in
no gentle manner, amid the jeers and laughter of the onlookers.

A beggar-man sat over against Eric’s stage and grinned every time a pate
was cracked. He was an uncouth fellow, ragged and dirty and unshaven.
Eric caught sight of his leering face at one of his boasts--for there
was a lull in the game, because no man else wanted to come within reach
of Eric’s blows. Eric, I say, noticed the beggar-man grinning at him
rather impudently, and turned toward him sharply.

“How now, you dirty villain!” quoth he, “mend your manners to your
betters, or, by our Lady, I’ll dust your rags for you.”

The beggar-man still grinned. “I am always ready to mend my manners to
my betters,” said he, “but I am afraid you cannot teach me any better
than you can dust my jacket.”

“Come up! Come up!” roared the other, flourishing his staff.

“That will I,” said the beggar, getting up slowly and with difficulty.
“It will pleasure me hugely to take a braggart down a notch, an some
good man will lend me a stout quarter-staff.”

At this a score of idlers reached him their staves--being ready enough
to see another man have his head cracked, even if they wished to save
their own--and he took the stoutest and heaviest of all. He made a sorry
enough figure as he climbed awkwardly upon the stage, but when he had
gained it, he towered full half a head above the other, for all his
awkwardness. Nathless, he held his stick so clumsily that the crowd
laughed in great glee.

Now each man took his place and looked the other up and down, watching
warily for an opening. Only a moment stood they thus, for Eric, intent
on teaching this rash beggar a lesson and sweeping him speedily off the
stage, launched forth boldly and gave the other a sounding crack on the
shoulder. The beggar danced about, and made as though he would drop his
staff from very pain, while the crowd roared and Eric raised himself for
another crushing blow. But just then the awkward beggar came to life.
Straightening himself like a flash, he dealt Eric a back-handed blow,
the like of which he had never before seen. Down went the boaster to the
floor with a sounding thump, and the fickle people yelled and laughed
themselves purple; for it was a new sight to see Eric of Lincoln eating
dust.

But he was up again almost as soon as he had fallen, and right quickly
retreated to his own ringside to gather his wits and watch for an
opening. He saw instantly that he had no easy antagonist, and he came in
cautiously this time.

And now those who stood around saw the merriest game of quarter-staff
that was ever played inside the walls of Nottingham town. Both men
were on their guard and fenced with fine skill, being well matched in
prowess. Again and again did Eric seek to force an opening under the
other’s guard, and just as often were his blows parried. The beggar
stood sturdily in his tracks contenting himself with beating off the
attack. For a long time their blows met like the steady crackling of
some huge forest fire, and Eric strove to be wary, for he now knew that
the other had no mean wits or mettle. But he grew right mad at last, and
began to send down blows so fierce and fast that you would have sworn
a great hail-storm was pounding on the shingles over your head. Yet he
never so much as entered the tall beggar’s guard.

Then at last the stranger saw his chance and changed his tune of
fighting. With one upward stroke he sent Eric’s staff whirling through
the air. With another he tapped Eric on the head; and, with a third
broad swing, ere the other could recover himself, he swept him clear off
the stage, much as you would brush a fly off the window pane.

Now the people danced and shouted and made so much ado that the
shop-keepers left their stalls and others came running from every
direction. The victory of the queer beggar made him immensely popular.
Eric had been a great bully, and many had suffered defeat and insult
at his hands. So the ragged stranger found money and food and drink
everywhere at his disposal, and he feasted right comfortably till the
afternoon.

Then a long bow contest came on, and to it the beggar went with some of
his new friends. It was held in the same arena that Robin had formerly
entered; and again the Sheriff and lords and ladies graced the scene
with their presence, while the people crowded to their places.

When the archers had stepped forward, the herald rose and proclaimed the
rules of the game: how that each man should shoot three shots, and to
him who shot best the prize of a yoke of fat steers should belong.
A dozen keen-eyed bowmen were there, and among them some of the best
fellows in the Forester’s and Sheriff’s companies. Down at the end of
the line towered the tall beggar-man, who must needs twang a bow-string
with the best of them.

The Sheriff noted his queer figure and asked: “Who is that ragged
fellow?”

“‘Tis he that hath but now so soundly cracked the crown of Eric of
Lincoln,” was the reply.

The shooting presently began, and the targets soon showed a fine
reckoning. Last of all came the beggar’s turn.

“By your leave,” he said loudly, “I’d like it well to shoot with any
other man here present at a mark of my own placing.” And he strode down
the lists with a slender peeled sapling which he stuck upright in the
ground. “There,” said he, “is a right good mark. Will any man try it?”

But not an archer would risk his reputation on so small a target.

Whereupon the beggar drew his bow with seeming carelessness and split
the wand with his shaft.

“Long live the beggar!” yelled the bystanders.

The Sheriff swore a full great oath, and said: “This man is the best
archer that ever yet I saw.” And he beckoned to him, and asked him: “How
now, good fellow, what is your name, and in what country were you born?”

“In Holderness I was born,” the man replied; “men call me Reynold
Greenleaf.”

“You are a sturdy fellow, Reynold Greenleaf, and deserve better apparel
than that you wear at present. Will you enter my service? I will give
you twenty marks a year, above your living, and three good suits of
clothes.”

“Three good suits, say you? Then right gladly will I enter your service,
for my back has been bare this many a long day.”

Then Reynold turned him about to the crowd and shouted: “Hark ye, good
people, I have entered the Sheriff’s service, and need not the yoke of
steers for prize. So take them for yourselves, to feast withal.”

At this the crowd shouted more merrily than ever, and threw their caps
high into the air. And none so popular a man had come to Nottingham town
in many a long day as this same Reynold Greenleaf.

Now you may have guessed, by this time, who Reynold Greenleaf really
was; so I shall tell you that he was none other than Little John. And
forth went he to the Sheriff’s house, and entered his service. But it
was a sorry day for the Sheriff when he got his new man. For Little John
winked his shrewd eye and said softly to himself: “By my faith, I shall
be the worst servant to him that ever yet had he!”

Two days passed by. Little John, it must be confessed, did not make
a good servant. He insisted upon eating the Sheriff’s best bread and
drinking his best wine, so that the steward waxed wroth. Nathless the
Sheriff held him in high esteem, and made great talk of taking him along
on the next hunting trip.

It was now the day of the banquet to the butchers, about which we have
already heard. The banquet hall, you must know, was not in the main
house, but connected with it by a corridor. All the servants were
bustling about making preparations for the feast, save only Little John,
who must needs lie abed the greater part of the day. But he presented
himself at last, when the dinner was half over; and being desirous
of seeing the guests for himself he went into the hall with the other
servants to pass the wine. First, however, I am afraid that some of
the wine passed his own lips while he went down the corridor. When he
entered the banqueting hall, whom should he see but Robin Hood himself.
We can imagine the start of surprise felt by each of these bold fellows
upon seeing the other in such strange company. But they kept their
secrets, as we have seen, and arranged to meet each other that same
night. Meanwhile, the proud Sheriff little knew that he harbored the two
chief outlaws of the whole countryside beneath his roof.

After the feast was over and night was beginning to advance, Little John
felt faint of stomach and remembered him that he had eaten nothing all
that day. Back went he to the pantry to see what eatables were laid by.
But there, locking up the stores for the night, stood the fat steward.

“Good Sir Steward,” said Little John, “give me to dine, for it is long
for Greenleaf to be fasting.”

The steward looked grimly at him and rattled the keys at his girdle.

“Sirrah lie-abed,” quoth he, “‘tis late in the day to be talking of
eating. Since you have waited thus long to be hungry, you can e’en take
your appetite back to bed again.”

“Now by mine appetite, that will I not do,” cried Little John. “Your
own paunch of fat would be enough for any bear to sleep on through the
winter. But my stomach craves food, and food it shall have!”

Saying this he brushed past the steward and tried the door, but it
was locked fast; whereat the fat steward chuckled and jangled his keys
again.

Then was Little John right mad, and he brought down his huge fist on the
door-panel with a sledge-hammer blow that shivered an opening you could
thrust your hand into. Little John stooped and peered through the hole
to see what food lay within reach, when crack! went the steward’s keys
upon his crown, and the worthy danced around him playing a tattoo that
made Little John’s ears ring. At this he turned upon the steward and
gave him such a rap that his back went nigh in two, and over went the
fat fellow rolling on the floor.

“Lie there,” quoth Little John, “till ye find strength to go to bed.
Meanwhile, I must be about my dinner.” And he kicked open the buttery
door without ceremony and brought to light a venison pasty and cold
roast pheasant--goodly sights to a hungry man. Placing these down on a
convenient shelf he fell to with right good will. So Little John ate and
drank as much as he would.

Now the Sheriff had in his kitchen a cook, a stout man and bold, who
heard the rumpus and came in to see how the land lay. There sat Little
John eating away for dear life, while the fat steward was rolled under
the table like a bundle of rags.

“I make my vow!” said the cook, “you are a shrewd hind to dwell thus in
a household, and ask thus to dine.” So saying he laid aside his spit and
drew a good sword that hung at his side.

“I make my vow!” said Little John, “you are a bold man and hardy to come
thus between me and my meat. So defend yourself and see that you prove
the better man.” And he drew his own sword and crossed weapons with the
cook.

Then back and forth they clashed with sullen sound. The old ballad which
tells of their fight says that they thought nothing for to flee, but
stiffly for to stand. There they fought sore together, two miles away
and more, but neither might the other harm for the space of a full hour.

“I make my vow!” cried Little John, “you are the best swordsman that
ever yet I saw. What say you to resting a space and eating and drinking
good health with me. Then we may fall to again with the swords.”

“Agreed!” said the cook, who loved good fare as well as a good fight;
and they both laid by their swords and fell to the food with hearty
will. The venison pasty soon disappeared, and the roast pheasant flew
at as lively a rate as ever the bird itself had sped. Then the warriors
rested a space and patted their stomachs, and smiled across at
each other like bosom friends; for a man when he as dined looks out
pleasantly upon the world.

“And now good Reynold Greenleaf,” said the cook, “we may as well settle
this brave fight we have in hand.”

“A true saying,” rejoined the other, “but first tell me, friend--for
I protest you are my friend henceforth--what is the score we have to
settle?”

“Naught save who can handle the sword best,” said the cook. “By my troth
I had thought to carve you like a capon ere now.”

“And I had long since thought to shave your ears,” replied Little John.
“This bout we can settle in right good time. But just now I and my
master have need of you, and you can turn your stout blade to better
service than that of the Sheriff.”

“Whose service would that be?” asked the cook.

“Mine,” answered a would-be butcher entering the room, “and I am Robin
Hood.”




CHAPTER V

HOW THE SHERIFF LOST THREE GOOD SERVANTS AND FOUND THEM AGAIN

     “Make good cheer,” said Robin Hood.
     “Sheriff! for charity!
     And for the love of Little John
     Thy life is granted thee!”

The cook gasped in amazement. This Robin Hood! and under the Sheriff’s
very roof!

“Now by my troth you are a brave fellow,” he said. “I have heard great
tales of your prowess, and the half has not been told. But who might
this tall slasher be?”

“Men do call me Little John, good fellow.”

“Then Little John, or Reynold Greenleaf, I like you well, on my honor as
Much the miller’s son; and you too, bold Robin Hood. An you take me, I
will enter your service right gladly.”

“Spoken like a stout man!” said Robin, seizing him by the hand. “But I
must back to my own bed, lest some sleepy warden stumble upon me, and
I be forced to run him through. Lucky for you twain that wine flowed
so freely in the house to-day; else the noise of your combat would have
brought other onlookers besides Robin Hood. Now if ye would flee the
house to-night, I will join you in the good greenwood to-morrow.”

“But, good master,” said the cook, “you would not stay here over night!
Verily, it is running your head into a noose. Come with us. The Sheriff
has set strict watch on all the gates, since ‘tis Fair week, but I know
the warden at the west gate and could bring us through safely. To-morrow
you will be stayed.” “Nay, that will I not,” laughed Robin, “for I shall
go through with no less escort than the Sheriff himself. Now do you,
Little John, and do you, Much the miller’s son, go right speedily. In
the borders of the wood you will find my merry men. Tell them to kill
two fine harts against to-morrow eve, for we shall have great company
and lordly sport.”

And Robin left them as suddenly as he had come.

“Comrade,” then said Little John, “we may as well bid the Sheriff’s roof
farewell. But ere we go, it would seem a true pity to fail to take such
of the Sheriff’s silver plate as will cause us to remember him, and also
grace our special feasts.”

“‘Tis well said indeed,” quoth the cook.

Thereupon they got a great sack and filled it with silver plate from the
shelves where it would not at once be missed, and they swung the sack
between them, and away they went, out of the house, out of the town, and
into the friendly shelter of Sherwood Forest.

The next morning the servants were late astir in the Sheriff’s house.
The steward awoke from a heavy sleep, but his cracked head was still in
such a whirl that he could not have sworn whether the Sheriff had ever
owned so much as one silver dish. So the theft went undiscovered for the
nonce.

Robin Hood met the Sheriff at breakfast, when his host soon spoke of
what was uppermost in his heart--the purchase of the fine herd of cattle
near Gamewell. ‘Twas clear that a vision of them, purchased for twenty
paltry gold pieces, had been with him all through the night, in his
dreams. And Robin again appeared such a silly fellow that the Sheriff
saw no need of dissembling, but said that he was ready to start at once
to look at the herd.

Accordingly they set forth, Robin in his little butcher’s cart, behind
the lean mare, and the Sheriff mounted on a horse. Out of Nottingham
town, through gates open wide, they proceeded, and took the hill road
leading through Sherwood Forest. And as they went on and plunged deeper
among the trees, Robin whistled blithely and sang snatches of tunes.

“Why are you so gay, fellow?” said the Sheriff, for, sooth to say, the
silence of the woods was making him uneasy.

“I am whistling to keep my courage up,” replied Robin.

“What is there to fear, when you have the Sheriff of Nottingham beside
you?” quoth the other pompously.

Robin scratched his head.

“They do say that Robin Hood and his men care little for the Sheriff,”
 he said.

“Pooh!” said the Sheriff. “I would not give _that_ for their lives, if
I could once lay hands upon them.” And he snapped his fingers angrily.
“But Robin Hood himself was on this very road the last time I came to
town,” said the other.

The Sheriff started at the crackling of a twig under his horse’s feet,
and looked around.

“Did you see him?” he asked.

“Aye, that did I! He wanted the use of this mare and cart to drive to
Nottingham. He said he would fain turn butcher. But see!”

As he spoke he came to a turn in the road, and there before them stood a
herd of the King’s deer, feeding. Robin pointed to them and continued:

“There is my herd of cattle, good Master Sheriff! How do you like them?
Are they not fat and fair to see?”

The Sheriff drew rein quickly. “Now fellow,” quoth he, “I would I were
well out of this forest, for I care not to see such herds as these, or
such faces as yours. Choose your own way, therefore, whoever you be, and
let me go mine.”

“Nay,” laughed Robin, seizing the Sheriff’s bridle, “I have been at too
much pains to cultivate your company to forego it now so easily. Besides
I wish you to meet some of my friends and dine with me, since you have
so lately entertained me at your board.”

So saying he clapped a horn on his lips and winded three merry notes.
The deer bounded away; and before the last of them was seen, there came
a running and a rustling, and out from behind covert and tree came full
twoscore of men, clad in Lincoln green, and bearing good yew bows in
their hands and short swords at their sides. Up they ran to Robin Hood
and doffed their caps to him respectfully, while the Sheriff sat still
from very amazement.

“Welcome to the greenwood!” said one of the leaders, bending the knee
with mock reverence before the Sheriff.

The Sheriff glared. It was Little John.

“Woe the worth, Reynold Greenleaf,” he said, “you have betrayed me!”

“I make my vow,” said Little John, “that you are to blame, master. I was
misserved of my dinner, when I was at your house. But we shall set you
down to a feast we hope you will enjoy.”

“Well spoken, Little John,” said Robin Hood. “Take you his bridle and
let us do honor to the guest who has come to feast with us.”

Then turning abruptly the whole company plunged into the heart of the
forest.

After twisting and turning till the Sheriff’s bewildered head sat
dizzily upon his shoulders, the greenwood men passed through a narrow
alley amid the trees which led to a goodly open space flanked by
wide-spreading oaks. Under the largest of these a pleasant fire was
crackling, and near it two fine harts lay ready for cooking. Around the
blaze were gathered another company of yeomen quite as large as that
which came with Robin Hood. Up sprang they as the latter advanced and
saluted their leader with deference, but with hearty gladness to see him
back again.

That merry wag Will Stutely was in command; and when he saw the
palefaced Sheriff being led in like any culprit, he took his cloak and
laid it humbly upon the ground and besought the Sheriff to alight upon
it, as the ground of Sherwood was unused to such dignitaries.

“Bestir yourselves, good fellows!” cried Robin Hood; “and while our new
cook, whom I see with us, is preparing a feast worthy of our high guest,
let us have a few games to do him honor!”

Then while the whole glade was filled with the savory smell of roasting
venison and fat capons, and brown pasties warmed beside the blaze,
and mulled wine sent forth a cordial fragrance, Robin Hood placed the
Sheriff upon a knoll beneath the largest oak and sat himself down by
him.

First stepped forward several pairs of men armed with the quarter-staff,
the widow’s sons among them, and so skilfully did they thrust and parry
and beat down guards, that the Sheriff, who loved a good game as well as
any man, clapped his hands, forgetting where he was, and shouted, “Well
struck! well struck! Never have I seen such blows at all the Fairs of
Nottingham!”

Then the best archers of the band set up a small wand at eightscore
paces distant, and thereon they affixed a wreath of green. And the
archers began to shoot; and he who shot not through the garland without
disturbing its leaves and tendrils was fain to submit to a good sound
buffet from Little John. But right cunning was the shooting, for the
men had spent a certain time in daily practice, and many were the shafts
which sped daintily through the circle. Nathless now and again some
luckless fellow would shoot awry and would be sent winding from a long
arm blow from the tall lieutenant while the glade roared with laughter.
And none more hearty a guffaw was given than came from the Sheriff’s own
throat, for the spirit of the greenwood was upon him.

But presently his high mood was dashed. The company sat down to meat,
and the guest was treated to two more disturbing surprise. The cook came
forward to serve the food, when the Sheriff beheld in him his own former
servant, and one whom he supposed was at the moment in the scullery at
Nottingham.

Much the miller’s son grinned by way of answer to the Sheriff’s
amazement, and served the plates, and placed them before the party. Then
did the Sheriff gasp and fairly choke with rage. The service was his own
silverware from the Mansion House!

“You rascals! you rogues!” he spluttered. “Was it not enough to defraud
me out of three of my servants, that you must also rob me of my best
silver service? Nay, by my life, but I will not touch your food!”

But Robin Hood bade him pause.

“Gramercy!” quoth he, “servants come and go, in merry England, and so
does service. The platters are but used to do your worship honor. And as
for your life, it is forfeit to your eagerness to buy my herd of cattle
so cheaply. Now sit you down again and make good cheer, Sheriff, for
charity! And for the love of Little John your life is granted you!”

So the Sheriff sat him down again, with the best face he could assume,
and soon the cook’s viands were disappearing down his gullet as rapidly
as the next man’s. And they feasted royally and clinked each other’s
cups until the sun had ceased to print the pattern of the leaves upon
the forest carpet.

Then the Sheriff arose and said: “I thank you, Robin Hood, one-time
butcher, and you, Little John, one-time beggar, and you, Much, one-time
cook, and all you good men who have entertained me in Sherwood so well.
Promises I make not as to how I shall requite you when next you come to
Nottingham, for I am in the King’s service. So for the present the score
rests with you. But the shadows grow long and I must away, if you will
be pleased to pilot me to the road.”

Then Robin Hood and all his men arose and drank the Sheriff’s health,
and Robin said: “If you must needs go at once we will not detain
you--except that you have forgotten two things.”

“What may they be?” asked the Sheriff, while his heart sank within him.

“You forget that you came with me to-day to buy a herd of horned beasts;
likewise that he who dines at the Greenwood Inn must pay the landlord.”

The Sheriff fidgeted like a small boy who has forgotten his lesson.

“Nay, I have but a small sum with me,” he began apologetically.

“What is that sum, gossip?” questioned Little John, “for my own wage
should also come out of it!”

“And mine!” said Much.

“And mine!” smiled Robin.

The Sheriff caught his breath. “By my troth, are all these silver dishes
worth anything?”

The outlaws roared heartily at this.

“I’ll tell you what it is, worship,” said Robin, “we three rascally
servants will compound our back wages for those plates. And we will keep
the herd of cattle free for our own use--and the King’s. But this little
tavern bill should be settled! Now, what sum have you about you?”

“I have only those twenty pieces of gold, and twenty others,” said the
Sheriff: and well it was that he told the truth for once, for Robin
said:

“Count it, Little John.”

Little John turned the Sheriff’s wallet inside out. “‘Tis true enough,”
 he said.

“Then you shall pay no more than twenty pieces for your entertainment,
excellence,” decreed Robin. “Speak I soothly, men of greenwood?”

“Good!” echoed the others.

“The Sheriff should swear by his patron saint that he will not molest
us,” said Will Stutely; and his addition was carried unanimously.

“So be it, then,” cried Little John, approaching the sheriff. “Now swear
by your life and your patron saint--”

“I will swear it by St. George, who is patron of us all,” said the
Sheriff vigorously, “that I will never disturb or distress the outlaws
in Sherwood.”

“But let me catch any of you _out_ of Sherwood!” thought he to himself.

Then the twenty pieces of gold were paid over, and the Sheriff once more
prepared to depart.

“Never had we so worshipful a guest before,” said Robin; “and as the new
moon is beginning to silver the leaves, I shall bear you company myself
for part of the way. ‘Twas I who brought you into the wood.”

“Nay, I protest against your going needlessly far,” said Sheriff.

“But I protest that I am loath to lose your company,” replied Robin.
“The next time I may not be so pleased.”

And he took the Sheriff’s horse by the bridle rein, and led him through
the lane and by many a thicket till the main road was reached.

“Now fare you well, good Sheriff,” he said, “and when next you think to
despoil a poor prodigal, remember the herd you would have bought over
against Gamewell. And when next you employ a servant, make certain that
he is not employing you.”

So saying he smote the nag’s haunch, and off went the Sheriff upon the
road to Nottingham.

And that is how--you will find from many ballads that came to be sung
at the Sheriff’s expense, and which are known even to the present
day--that, I say, is how the Sheriff lost three good servants and found
them again.




CHAPTER VI

HOW ROBIN HOOD MET WILL SCARLET

     The youngster was clothed in scarlet red
     In scarlet fine and gay;
     And he did frisk it o’er the plain,
     And chanted a roundelay.

One fine morning, soon after the proud Sheriff had been brought to
grief, Robin Hood and Little John went strolling down a path through the
wood. It was not far from the foot--bridge where they had fought their
memorable battle; and by common impulse they directed their steps to
the brook to quench their thirst and rest them in the cool bushes. The
morning gave promise of a hot day. The road even by the brook was dusty.
So the cooling stream was very pleasing and grateful to their senses.

On each side of them, beyond the dusty highway, stretched out broad
fields of tender young corn. On the yon side of the fields uprose the
sturdy oaks and beeches and ashes of the forest; while at their feet
modest violets peeped out shyly and greeted the loiterers with an odor
which made the heart glad. Over on the far side of the brook in a tiny
bay floated three lily-pads; and from amid some clover blossoms on the
bank an industrious bee rose with the hum of busy contentment. It was a
day so brimful of quiet joy that the two friends lay flat on their
backs gazing up at the scurrying clouds, and neither caring to break the
silence.

Presently they heard some one coming up the road whistling gaily, as
though he owned the whole world and ‘twas but made to whistle in. Anon
he chanted a roundelay with a merry note.

“By my troth, a gay bird!” quoth Robin, raising up on his elbow. “Let us
lie still, and trust that his purse is not as light as his heart.”

So they lay still, and in a minute more up came a smart stranger dressed
in scarlet and silk and wearing a jaunty hat with a curling cock feather
in it. His whole costume was of scarlet, from the feather to the silk
hosen on his legs. A goodly sword hung at his side, its scabbard all
embossed with tilting knights and weeping ladies. His hair was long and
yellow and hung clustering about his shoulders, for all the world like a
schoolgirl’s; and he bore himself with as mincing a gait as the pertest
of them.

Little John clucked his teeth drolly at this sight. “By my troth, a gay
bird!” he said echoing the other’s words--then added, “But not so bad a
build for all his prettiness. Look you, those calves and thighs are well
rounded and straight. The arms, for all that gold-wrought cloak, hang
stoutly from full shoulders. I warrant you the fop can use his dainty
sword right well on occasion.”

“Nay,” retorted Robin, “he is naught but a ladies’ man from court. My
long-bow ‘gainst a plugged shilling that he would run and bellow lustily
at sight of a quarter-staff. Stay you behind this bush and I will soon
get some rare sport out of him. Belike his silk purse may contain more
pennies than the law allows to one man in Sherwood or Barnesdale.”

So saying Robin Hood stepped forth briskly from the covert and planted
himself in the way of the scarlet stranger. The latter had walked
so slowly that he was scarce come to their resting-place; and now
on beholding Robin he neither slackened nor quickened his pace but
sauntered idly straight ahead, looking to the right and to the left,
with the finest air in the world, but never once at Robin.

“Hold!” quoth the outlaw. “What mean ye by running thus over a wayfarer,
rough shod?”

“Wherefore should I hold, good fellow?” said the stranger in a smooth
voice, and looking at Robin for the first time.

“Because I bid you to,” replied Robin.

“And who may you be?” asked the other as coolly as you please.

“What my name is matters not,” said Robin; “but know that I am a public
tax-gatherer and equalizer of shillings. If your purse have more than a
just number of shillings or pence, I must e’en lighten it somewhat; for
there are many worthy people round about these borders who have less
than the just amount. Wherefore, sweet gentleman, I pray you hand over
your purse without more ado, that I may judge of its weight in proper
fashion.”

The other smiled as sweetly as though a lady were paying him a
compliment.

“You are a droll fellow,” he said calmly. “Your speech amuses me
mightily. Pray continue, if you have not done, for I am in no hurry this
morning.”

“I have said all with my tongue that is needful,” retorted Robin,
beginning to grow red under the collar. “Nathless, I have other
arguments which may not be so pleasing to your dainty skin. Prithee,
stand and deliver. I promise to deal fairly with the purse.”

“Alack-a-day!” said the stranger with a little shrug of his shoulders;
“I am deeply sorrowful that I cannot show my purse to every rough lout
that asks to see it. But I really could not, as I have further need of
it myself and every farthing it contains. Wherefore, pray stand aside.”

“Nay that will I not! and ‘twill go the harder with you if you do not
yield at once.”

“Good fellow,” said the other gently, “have I not heard all your speech
with patience? Now that is all I promised to do. My conscience is salved
and I must go on my way. To-rol-o-rol-e-loo!” he caroled, making as
though to depart.

“Hold, I say!” quoth Robin hotly; for he knew how Little John must be
chuckling at this from behind the bushes. “Hold I say, else I shall have
to bloody those fair locks of yours!” And he swung his quarter-staff
threateningly.

“Alas!” moaned the stranger shaking his head. “The pity of it all! Now I
shall have to run this fellow through with my sword! And I hoped to be a
peaceable man henceforth!” And sighing deeply he drew his shining blade
and stood on guard.

“Put by your weapon,” said Robin. “It is too pretty a piece of steel to
get cracked with common oak cudgel; and that is what would happen on
the first pass I made at you. Get you a stick like mine out of yon
undergrowth, and we will fight fairly, man to man.”

The stranger thought a moment with his usual slowness, and eyed Robin
from head to foot. Then he unbuckled his scabbard, laid it and the sword
aside, and walked deliberately over to the oak thicket. Choosing from
among the shoots and saplings he found a stout little tree to his
liking, when he laid hold of it, without stopping to cut it, and gave a
tug. Up it came root and all, as though it were a stalk of corn, and the
stranger walked back trimming it as quietly as though pulling up trees
were the easiest thing in the world.

Little John from his hiding-place saw the feat, and could hardly
restrain a long whistle. “By our Lady!” he muttered to himself, “I would
not be in Master Robin’s boots!”

Whatever Robin thought upon seeing the stranger’s strength, he uttered
not a word and budged not an inch. He only put his oak staff at parry as
the other took his stand.

There was a threefold surprise that day, by the brookside. The stranger
and Robin and Little John in the bushes all found a combat that upset
all reckoning. The stranger for all his easy strength and cool nerve
found an antagonist who met his blows with the skill of a woodman. Robin
found the stranger as hard to hit as though fenced in by an oak hedge.
While Little John rolled over and over in silent joy.

Back and forth swayed the fighters, their cudgels pounding this way and
that, knocking off splinters and bark, and threatening direst damage to
bone and muscle and skin. Back and forth they pranced kicking up a cloud
of dust and gasping for fresh air. From a little way off you would have
vowed that these two men were trying to put out a fire, so thickly
hung the cloud of battle over them. Thrice did Robin smite the scarlet
man--with such blows that a less stout fellow must have bowled over.
Only twice did the scarlet man smite Robin, but the second blow was
like to finish him. The first had been delivered over the knuckles, and
though ‘twas a glancing stroke it well nigh broke Robin’s fingers, so
that he could not easily raise his staff again. And while he was dancing
about in pain and muttering a dust-covered oath, the other’s staff came
swinging through the cloud at one side--zip!--and struck him under the
arm. Down went Robin as though he were a nine-pin--flat down into the
dust of the road. But despite the pain he was bounding up again like an
India rubber man to renew the attack, when Little John interfered.

“Hold!” said he, bursting out of the bushes and seizing the stranger’s
weapon. “Hold, I say!”

“Nay,” retorted the stranger quietly, “I was not offering to smite him
while he was down. But if there be a whole nest of you hatching here by
the waterside, cluck out the other chicks and I’ll make shift to fight
them all.”

“Not for all the deer in Sherwood!” cried Robin. “You are a good fellow
and a gentleman. I’ll fight no more with you, for verily I feel sore in
wrist and body. Nor shall any of mine molest you henceforth.”

Sooth to say, Robin did not look in good fighting trim. His clothes were
coated with dirt, one of his hosen had slipped halfway down from his
knee, the sleeve of his jerkin was split, and his face was streaked with
sweat and dirt. Little John eyed him drolly.

“How now, good master,” quoth he, “the sport you were to kick up has
left you in sorry plight. Let me dust your coat for you.”

“Marry, it has been dusted enough already,” replied Robin; “and I now
believe the Scripture saying that all men are but dust, for it has
sifted me through and through and lined my gullet an inch deep. By your
leave”--and he went to the brookside and drank deep and laved his face
and hands.

All this while the stranger had been eyeing Robin attentively and
listening to his voice as though striving to recall it.

“If I mistake not,” he said slowly at last, “you are that famous outlaw,
Robin Hood of Barnesdale.”

“You say right,” replied Robin; “but my fame has been tumbling sadly
about in the dust to-day.”

“Now why did I not know you at once?” continued the stranger. “This
battle need not have happened, for I came abroad to find you to-day, and
thought to have remembered your face and speech. Know you not me, Rob,
my lad? Hast ever been to Gamewell Lodge?”

“Ha! Will Gamewell! my dear old chum, Will Gamewell!” shouted Robin,
throwing his arms about the other in sheer affection. “What an ass I was
not to recognize you! But it has been years since we parted, and your
gentle schooling has polished you off mightily.”

Will embraced his cousin no less heartily.

“We are quits on not knowing kinsmen,” he said, “for you have changed
and strengthened much from the stripling with whom I used to run foot
races in old Sherwood.”

“But why seek you me?” asked Robin. “You know I am an outlaw and
dangerous company. And how left you mine uncle? and have you heard aught
of late of--of Maid Marian?”

“Your last question first,” answered Will, laughing, “for I perceive
that it lies nearest your heart. I saw Maid Marian not many weeks after
the great shooting at Nottingham, when you won her the golden arrow. She
prizes the bauble among her dearest possessions, though it has made her
an enemy in the Sheriff’s proud daughter. Maid Marian bade me tell you,
if I ever saw you, that she must return to Queen Eleanor’s court, but
she could never forget the happy days in the greenwood. As for the old
Squire, he is still hale and hearty, though rheumatic withal. He speaks
of you as a sad young dog, but for all that is secretly proud of your
skill at the bow and of the way you are pestering the Sheriff, whom
he likes not. ‘Twas for my father’s sake that I am now in the open, an
outlaw like yourself. He has had a steward, a surly fellow enough, who,
while I was away at school, boot-licked his way to favor until he lorded
it over the whole house. Then he grew right saucy and impudent, but my
father minded it not, deeming the fellow indispensable in managing the
estate. But when I came back it irked me sorely to see the fellow strut
about as though he owned the place. He was sly enough with me at first,
and would brow-beat the Squire only while I was out of earshot. It
chanced one day, however, that I heard loud voices through an open
window and paused to hearken. That vile servant called my father ‘a
meddling old fool,’ ‘Fool and meddler art thou thyself, varlet,’ I
shouted, springing through the window, ‘_that_ for thy impudence!’ and
in my heat I smote him a blow mightier than I intended, for I have
some strength in mine arm. The fellow rolled over and never breathed
afterwards, I think I broke his neck or something the like. Then I knew
that the Sheriff would use this as a pretext to hound my father, if I
tarried. So I bade the Squire farewell and told him I would seek you in
Sherwood.”

“Now by my halidom!” said Robin Hood; “for a man escaping the law, you
took it about as coolly as one could wish. To see you come tripping
along decked out in all your gay plumage and trolling forth a roundelay,
one would think you had not a care in all the world. Indeed I remarked
to Little John here that I hoped your purse was not as light as your
heart.”

“Belike you meant _head_,” laughed Will; “and is this Little John the
Great? Shake hands with me, an you will, and promise me to cross a staff
with me in friendly bout some day in the forest!”

“That will I!” quoth Little John heartily. “Here’s my hand on it. What
is your last name again, say you?”

“‘Tis to be changed,” interposed Robin; “then shall the men armed with
warrants go hang for all of us. Let me bethink myself. Ah!--I have it!
In scarlet he came to us, and that shall be his name henceforth. Welcome
to the greenwood, Will Scarlet!”

“Aye, welcome, Will Scarlet!” said Little John; and they all clasped
hands again and swore to be true each to the other and to Robin Hood’s
men in Sherwood Forest.




CHAPTER VII

HOW ROBIN HOOD MET FRIAR TUCK

     The friar took Robin Hood on his back,
     Deep water he did bestride,
     And spake neither good word nor bad,
     Till he came at the other side.

In summer time when leaves grow green, and flowers are fresh and gay,
Robin Hood and his merry men were all disposed to play. Thus runs a
quaint old ballad which begins the next adventure. Then some would leap
and some would run and some try archery and some ply the quarter-staff
and some fall to with the good broad sword. Some again would try a round
at buffet and fisticuff; and thus by every variety of sport and exercise
they perfected themselves in skill and made the band and its prowess
well known throughout all England.

It had been a custom of Robin Hood’s to pick out the best men in all the
countryside. Whenever he heard of one more than usually skilled in
any feat of arms he would seek the man and test him in personal
encounter--which did not always end happily for Robin. And when he had
found a man to his liking he offered him service with the bold fellows
of Sherwood Forest.

Thus it came about that one day after a practice at shooting, in which
Little John struck down a hart at five hundred feet distance, Robin Hood
was fain to boast.

“God’s blessing on your heart!” he cried, clapping the burly fellow on
the shoulder; “I would travel an hundred miles to find one who could
match you!”

At this Will Scarlet laughed full roundly.

“There lives a curtall friar in Fountain’s Abbey--Tuck, by name--who can
beat both him and you,” he said.

Robin pricked up his ears at this free speech.

“By our Lady,” he said, “I’ll neither eat nor drink till I see this same
friar.”

And with his usual impetuosity he at once set about arming himself for
the adventure. On his head he placed a cap of steel. Underneath his
Lincoln green he wore a coat of chain metal. Then with sword and buckler
girded at his side he made a goodly show. But he also took with him his
stout yew bow and a sheaf of chosen arrows.

So he set forth upon his way with blithe heart; for it was a day when
the whole face of the earth seemed glad and rejoicing in pulsing life.
Steadily he pressed forward by winding ways till he came to a green
broad pasture land at whose edge flowed a stream dipping in and out
among the willows and rushes on the banks. A pleasant stream it was, but
it flowed calmly as though of some depth in the middle. Robin did not
fancy getting his feet wet, or his fine suit of mail rusted, so he
paused on the hither bank to rest and take his bearings.

As he sat down quietly under the shade of a drooping willow he heard
snatches of a jovial song floating to him from the farther side; then
came a sound of two men’s voices arguing. One was upholding the
merits of hasty pudding and the other stood out stoutly for meat pie,
“especially”--quoth this one--“when flavored with young onions!”

“Gramercy!” muttered Robin to himself, “that is a tantalizing speech to
a hungry man! But, odds bodikins! did ever two men talk more alike than
those two fellows yonder!”

In truth Robin could well marvel at the speech, for the voices were
curiously alike.

Presently the willows parted on the other bank, and Robin could hardly
forebear laughing out right. His mystery was explained. It was not two
men who had done all this singing and talking, but one--and that one a
stout curtall friar who wore a long cloak over his portly frame, tied
with a cord in the middle. On his head was a knight’s helmet, and in his
hand was a no more warlike weapon than a huge pasty pie, with which he
sat down by the water’s edge. His twofold argument was finished. The
meat pie had triumphed; and no wonder! for it was the present witness,
soon to give its own testimony.

But first the friar took off his helmet to cool his head, and a droll
picture he made. His head was as round as an apple, and eke as smooth in
spots. A fringe of close curling black hair grew round the base of his
skull, but his crown was bare and shiny as an egg. His cheeks also were
smooth and red and shiny; and his little gray eyes danced about with
the funniest air imaginable. You would not have blamed Robin Hood for
wanting to laugh, had you heard this serious two-faced talk and then
seen this jovial one-faced man. Good humor and fat living stood out all
over him; yet for all that he looked stout enough and able to take
care of himself with any man. His short neck was thick like that of a
Berkshire bull; his shoulders were set far back, and his arms sprouted
therefrom like two oak limbs. As he sat him down, the cloak fell apart
disclosing a sword and buckler as stout as Robin’s own.

Nathless, Robin was not dismayed at sight of the weapons. Instead, his
heart fell within him when he saw the meat pie which was now in fair
way to be devoured before his very eyes; for the friar lost no time in
thrusting one hand deep into the pie, while he crossed himself with the
other.

Thereupon Robin seized his bow and fitted a shaft.

“Hey, friar!” he sang out, “carry me over the water, or else I cannot
answer for your safety.”

The other started at the unexpected greeting, and laid his hand upon
his sword. Then he looked up and beheld Robin’s arrow pointing full upon
him.

“Put down your bow, fellow,” he shouted back, “and I will bring you over
the brook. ‘Tis our duty in life to help each other, and your keen shaft
shows me that you are a man worthy of some attention.” So the friar
knight got him up gravely, though his eyes twinkled with a cunning
light, and laid aside his beloved pie and his cloak and his sword and
his buckler, and waded across the stream with waddling dignity. Then he
took Robin Hood upon his back and spoke neither good word nor bad till
he came to the other side.

Lightly leaped Robin off his back, and said, “I am much beholden to you,
good father.”

“Beholden, say you!” rejoined the other drawing his sword; “then by my
faith you shall e’en repay your score. Now mine own affairs, which are
of a spiritual kind and much more important than yours which are carnal,
lie on the other side of this stream. I see that you are a likely man
and one, moreover, who would not refuse to serve the church. I must
therefore pray of you that whatsoever I have done unto you, you will do
also unto me. In short, my son, you must e’en carry me back again.”

Courteously enough was this said; but so suddenly had the friar drawn
his sword that Robin had no time to unsling his bow from his back,
whither he had placed it to avoid getting it wet, or to unfasten his
scabbard. So he was fain to temporize.

“Nay, good father, but I shall get my feet wet,” he commenced.

“Are your feet any better than mine?” retorted the other. “I fear me
now that I have already wetted myself so sadly as to lay in a store of
rheumatic pains by way of penance.”

“I am not so strong as you,” continued Robin; “that helmet and sword and
buckler would be my undoing on the uncertain footing amidstream, to say
nothing of your holy flesh and bones.”

“Then I will lighten up, somewhat,” replied the other calmly. “Promise
to carry me across and I will lay aside my war gear.”

“Agreed,” said Robin; and the friar thereupon stripped himself; and
Robin bent his stout back and took him up even as he had promised.

Now the stones at the bottom of the stream were round and slippery, and
the current swept along strongly, waist-deep, in the middle. More-over
Robin had a heavier load than the other had borne, nor did he know the
ford. So he went stumbling along now stepping into a deep hole, now
stumbling over a boulder in a manner that threatened to unseat his rider
or plunge them both clear under current. But the fat friar hung on and
dug his heels into his steed’s ribs in as gallant manner as if he were
riding in a tournament; while as for poor Robin the sweat ran down him
in torrents and he gasped like the winded horse he was. But at last he
managed to stagger out on the bank and deposit his unwieldy load.

No sooner had he set the friar down than he seized his own sword.

“Now, holy friar,” quoth he, panting and wiping the sweat from his brow,
“what say the Scriptures that you quote so glibly?--Be not weary of
well doing. You must carry me back again or I swear that I will make a
cheese-cloth out of your jacket!”

The friar’s gray eyes once more twinkled with a cunning gleam that boded
no good to Robin; but his voice was as calm and courteous as ever.

“Your wits are keen, my son,” he said; “and I see that the waters of the
stream have not quenched your spirit. Once more will I bend my back to
the oppressor and carry the weight of the haughty.”

So Robin mounted again in high glee, and carried his sword in his
hand, and went prepared to tarry upon the other side. But while he
was bethinking himself what great words to use, when he should arrive
thither, he felt himself slipping from the friar’s broad back. He
clutched frantically to save himself but had too round a surface to
grasp, besides being hampered by his weapon. So down went he with a
loud splash into the middle of the stream, where the crafty friar had
conveyed him.

“There!” quoth the holy man; “choose you, choose you, my fine fellow,
whether you will sink or swim!” And he gained his own bank without more
ado, while Robin thrashed and spluttered about until he made shift to
grasp a willow wand and thus haul himself ashore on the other side.

Then Robin’s rage waxed furious, despite his wetting, and he took his
bow and his arrows and let fly one shaft after another at the worthy
friar. But they rattled harmlessly off his steel buckler, while he
laughed and minded them no more than if they had been hail-stones.

“Shoot on, shoot on, good fellow,” he sang out; “shoot as you have
begun; if you shoot here a summer’s day, your mark I will not shun!”

So Robin shot, and passing well, till all his arrows were gone, when
from very rage he began to revile him.

“You bloody villain!” shouted he, “You psalm-singing hypocrite! You
reviler of good hasty pudding! Come but within reach of my sword
arm, and, friar or no friar, I’ll shave your tonsure closer than ever
bald-pated monk was shaven before!”

“Soft you and fair!” said the friar unconcernedly; “hard words are
cheap, and you may need your wind presently. An you would like a bout
with swords, meet me halfway i’ the stream.”

And with this speech the friar waded into the brook, sword in hand,
where he was met halfway by the impetuous outlaw.

Thereupon began a fierce and mighty battle. Up and down, in and out,
back and forth they fought. The swords flashed in the rays of the
declining sun and then met with a clash that would have shivered less
sturdy weapons or disarmed less sturdy wielders. Many a smart blow was
landed, but each perceived that the other wore an undercoat of linked
mail which might not be pierced. Nathless, their ribs ached at the force
of the blows. Once and again they paused by mutual consent and caught
breath and looked hard each at the other; for never had either met so
stout a fellow.

Finally in a furious onset of lunge and parry Robin’s foot stepped on a
rolling stone, and he went down upon his knees. But his antagonist would
not take this advantage: he paused until Robin should get upon his feet.

“Now by our Lady!” cried the outlaw, using his favorite oath, “you are
the fairest swordsman that I have met in many a long day. I would beg a
boon of you.”

“What is it?” said the other.

“Give me leave to set my horn to my mouth and blow three blasts
thereon.”

“That will I do,” said the curtall friar, “blow till your breath fails,
an it please you.”

Then, says the old ballad, Robin Hood set his horn to mouth and blew
mighty blasts; and half a hundred yeomen, bows bent, came raking over
the lee.

“Whose men are these,” said the friar, “that come so hastily?”

“These men are mine,” said Robin Hood, feeling that his time to laugh
was come at last.

Then said the friar in his turn, “A boon, a boon, the like I gave to
you. Give me leave to set my fist to my mouth and whistle three blasts
thereon.”

“That will I do,” said Robin, “or else I were lacking in courtesy.”

The friar set his fist to his mouth and put the horn to shame by the
piercing whistles he blew; whereupon half a hundred great dogs came
running and jumping so swiftly that they had reached their bank as soon
as Robin Hood’s men had reached his side.

Then followed a rare foolish conflict. Stutely, Much, Little John
and the other outlaws began sending their arrows whizzing toward the
opposite bank; but the dogs, which were taught of the friar, dodged the
missiles cleverly and ran and fetched them back again, just as the dogs
of to-day catch sticks.

“I have never seen the like of this in my days!” cried Little John,
amazed.

“‘Tis rank sorcery and witchcraft.”

“Take off your dogs, Friar Tuck!” shouted Will Scarlet, who had but then
run up, and who now stood laughing heartily at the scene.

“Friar Tuck!” exclaimed Robin, astounded. “Are you Friar Tuck? Then am I
your friend, for you are he I came to seek.”

“I am but a poor anchorite, a curtall friar,” said the other, whistling
to his pack, “by name Friar Tuck of Fountain’s Dale. For seven years
have I tended the Abbey here, preached o’ Sundays, and married and
christened and buried folk--and fought too, if need were; and if it
smacks not too much of boasting, I have not yet met the knight or
trooper or yeoman that I would yield before. But yours is a stout blade.
I would fain know you.”

“‘Tis Robin Hood, the outlaw, who has been assisting you at this
christening,” said Will Scarlet glancing roguishly at the two opponents’
dripping garments. And at this sally the whole bad burst into a shout of
laughter, in which Robin and Friar Tuck joined.

“Robin Hood!” cried the good friar presently, holding his sides; “are
you indeed that famous yeoman? Then I like you well; and had I known you
earlier, would have both carried you across and shared my pasty pie with
you.”

“To speak soothly,” replied Robin gaily, “‘twas that same pie that led
me to be rude. Now, therefore, bring it and your dogs and repair with us
to the greenwood. We have need of you--with this message came I to-day
to seek you. We will build you a hermitage in Sherwood Forest, and you
shall keep us from evil ways. Will you not join our band?”

“Marry, that will I!” cried Friar Tuck jovially. “Once more will I cross
this much beforded stream, and go with you to the good greenwood!”




CHAPTER VIII

HOW ALLAN-A-DALE’S WOOING WAS PROSPERED

     “What is thy name?” then said Robin Hood,
     “Come tell me, without any fail!”
      “By the faith o’ my body,” then said the young man,
     “My name it is Allan-a-Dale.”

Friar Tuck and Much the miller’s son soon became right good friends over
the steaming stew they jointly prepared for the merry men that evening.
Tuck was mightily pleased when he found a man in the forest who could
make pasties and who had cooked for no less person than the High Sheriff
himself. While Much marveled at the friar’s knowledge of herbs and
simples and woodland things which savored a stew greatly. So they
gabbled together like two old gossips and, between them, made such a
tasty mess that Robin Hood and his stout followers were like never to
leave off eating. And the friar said grace too, with great unction, over
the food; and Robin said Amen! and that henceforth they were always to
have mass of Sundays.

So Robin walked forth into the wood that evening with his stomach full
and his heart, therefore, in great contentment and love for other men.
He did not stop the first passer-by, as his manner often was, and desire
a fight. Instead, he stepped behind a tree, when he heard a man’s voice
in song, and waited to behold the singer. Perhaps he remembered, also,
the merry chanting of Will Scarlet, and how he had tried to give it
pause a few days before.

Like Will, this fellow was clad in scarlet, though he did not look quite
as fine a gentleman. Nathless, he was a sturdy yeoman of honest face and
a voice far sweeter than Will’s. He seemed to be a strolling minstrel,
for he bore a harp in his hand, which he thrummed, while his lusty tenor
voice rang out with--

     “Hey down, and a down, and a down!
     I’ve a lassie back i’ the town;
     Come day, come night, Come dark or light,
     She will wed me, back i’ the town!”

Robin let the singer pass, caroling on his way.

“‘Tis not in me to disturb a light-hearted lover, this night,” he
muttered, a memory of Marian coming back to him. “Pray heaven she may be
true to him and the wedding be a gay one ‘back i’ the town!”’

So Robin went back to his camp, where he told of the minstrel.

“If any of ye set on him after this,” quoth he in ending, “bring him to
me, for I would have speech with him.”

The very next day his wish was gratified. Little John and Much the
miller’s son were out together on a foraging expedition when they espied
the same young man; at least, they thought it must be he, for he was
clad in scarlet and carried a harp in his hand. But now he came drooping
along the way; his scarlet was all in tatters; and at every step he
fetched a sigh, “Alack and a well-a-day!”

Then stepped forth Little John and Much the miller’s son.

“Ho! do not wet the earth with your weeping,” said Little John, “else we
shall all have lumbago.”

No sooner did the young man catch sight of them than he bent his bow,
and held an arrow back to his ear.

“Stand off! stand off!” he said; “what is your will with me?”

“Put by your weapon,” said Much, “we will not harm you. But you must
come before our master straight, under yon greenwood tree.”

So the minstrel put by his bow and suffered himself to be led before
Robin Hood.

“How now!” quoth Robin, when he beheld his sorry countenance, “are you
not he whom I heard no longer ago than yesternight caroling so blithely
about ‘a lassie back i’ the town’?”

“The same in body, good sir,” replied the other sadly; “but my spirit is
grievously changed.”

“Tell me your tale,” said Robin courteously. “Belike I can help you.”

“That can no man on earth, I fear,” said the stranger; “nathless, I’ll
tell you the tale. Yesterday I stood pledged to a maid, and thought
soon to wed her. But she has been taken from me and is to become an
old knight’s bride this very day; and as for me, I care not what ending
comes to my days, or how soon, without her.”

“Marry, come up!” said Robin; “how got the old knight so sudden
vantage?”

“Look you, worship, ‘tis this way. The Normans overrun us, and are in
such great favor that none may say them nay. This old returned Crusader
coveted the land whereon my lady dwells. The estate is not large, but
all in her own right; whereupon her brother says she shall wed a title,
and he and the old knight have fixed it up for to-day.”

“Nay, but surely--” began Robin.

“Hear me out, worship,” said the other. “Belike you think me a sorry
dog not to make fight of this. But the old knight, look you, is not
come-at-able. I threw one of his varlets into a thorn hedge, and another
into a water-butt, and a third landed head-first into a ditch. But I
couldn’t do any fighting at all.”

“‘Tis a pity!” quoth Little John gravely. He had been sitting
cross-legged listening to this tale of woe. “What think you, Friar Tuck,
doth not a bit of fighting ease a man’s mind?”

“Blood-letting is ofttimes recommended of the leeches,” replied Tuck.

“Does the maid love you?” asked Robin Hood.

“By our troth, she loved me right well,” said the minstrel. “I have a
little ring of hers by me which I have kept for seven long years.”

“What is your name?” then said Robin Hood.

“By the faith of my body,” replied the young man, “my name is
Allan-a-Dale.”

“What will you give me, Allan-a-Dale,” said Robin Hood, “in ready gold
or fee, to help you to your true love again, and deliver her back unto
you?”

“I have no money, save only five shillings,” quoth Allan; “but--are you
not Robin Hood?”

Robin nodded.

“Then you, if any one, can aid me!” said Allan-a-Dale eagerly. “And if
you give me back my love, I swear upon the Book that I will be your true
servant forever after.”

“Where is this wedding to take place, and when?” asked Robin.

“At Plympton Church, scarce five miles from here; and at three o’ the
afternoon.”

“Then to Plympton we will go!” cried Robin suddenly springing into
action; and he gave out orders like a general: “Will Stutely, do you
have four-and-twenty good men over against Plympton Church ‘gainst three
o’ the afternoon. Much, good fellow, do you cook up some porridge for
this youth, for he must have a good round stomach--aye, and a better
gear! Will Scarlet, you will see to decking him out bravely for the
nonce. And Friar Tuck, hold yourself in readiness, good book in hand, at
the church. Mayhap you had best go ahead of us all.”

The fat Bishop of Hereford was full of pomp and importance that day at
Plympton Church. He was to celebrate the marriage of an old knight--a
returned Crusader--and a landed young woman; and all the gentry
thereabout were to grace the occasion with their presence. The church
itself was gaily festooned with flowers for the ceremony, while out
in the church-yard at one side brown ale flowed freely for all the
servitors.

Already were the guests beginning to assemble, when the Bishop, back in
the vestry, saw a minstrel clad in green walk up boldly to the door and
peer within. It was Robin Hood, who had borrowed Allan’s be-ribboned
harp for the time.

“Now who are you, fellow?” quoth the Bishop, “and what do you here at
the church-door with you harp and saucy air?”

“May it please your Reverence,” returned Robin bowing very humbly, “I
am but a strolling harper, yet likened the best in the whole North
Countree. And I had hope that my thrumming might add zest to the wedding
to-day.”

“What tune can you harp?” demanded the Bishop.

“I can harp a tune so merry that a forlorn lover will forget he is
jilted,” said Robin. “I can harp another tune that will make a bride
forsake her lord at the altar. I can harp another tune that will bring
loving souls together though they were up hill and down dale five good
miles away from each other.”

“Then welcome, good minstrel,” said the Bishop, “music pleases me right
well, and if you can play up to your prattle, ‘twill indeed grace your
ceremony. Let us have a sample of your wares.”

“Nay, I must not put finger to string until the bride and groom have
come. Such a thing would ill fortune both us and them.”

“Have it as you will,” said the Bishop, “but here comes the party now.”

Then up the lane to the church came the old knight, preceded by ten
archers liveried in scarlet and gold. A brave sight the archers made,
but their master walked slowly leaning upon a cane and shaking as though
in a palsy.

And after them came a sweet lass leaning upon her brother’s arm. Her
hair did shine like glistering gold, and her eyes were like blue violets
that peep out shyly at the sun. The color came and went in her cheeks
like that tinting of a sea-shell, and her face was flushed as though
she had been weeping. But now she walked with a proud air, as though she
defied the world to crush her spirit. She had but two maids with her,
finikin lasses, with black eyes and broad bosoms, who set off their
lady’s more delicate beauty well. One held up the bride’s gown from the
ground; the other carried flowers in plenty.

“Now by all the wedding bells that ever were rung!” quoth Robin boldly,
“this is the worst matched pair that ever mine eyes beheld!”

“Silence, miscreant!” said a man who stood near.

The Bishop had hurriedly donned his gown and now stood ready to meet the
couple at the chancel.

But Robin paid no heed to him. He let the knight and his ten archers
pass by, then he strode up to the bride, and placed himself on the other
side from her brother.

“Courage, lady!” he whispered, “there is another minstrel near, who
mayhap may play more to your liking.”

The lady glanced at him with a frightened air, but read such honesty and
kindness in his glance that she brightened and gave him a grateful look.

“Stand aside, fool!” cried the brother wrathfully.

“Nay, but I am to bring good fortune to the bride by accompanying her
through the church-doors,” said Robin laughing.

Thereupon he was allowed to walk by her side unmolested, up to the
chancel with the party.

“Now strike up your music, fellow!” ordered the Bishop.

“Right gladly will I,” quoth Robin, “an you will let me choose my
instrument. For sometimes I like the harp, and other times I think the
horn makes the merriest music in all the world.”

And he drew forth his bugle from underneath his green cloak and blew
three winding notes that made the church--rafters ring again.

“Seize him!” yelled the Bishop; “there’s mischief afoot! These are the
tricks of Robin Hood!”

The ten liveried archers rushed forward from the rear of the church,
where they had been stationed. But their rush was blocked by the
onlookers who now rose from their pews in alarm and crowded the aisles.
Meanwhile Robin had leaped lightly over the chancel rail and stationed
himself in a nook by the altar.

“Stand where you are!” he shouted, drawing his bow, “the first man to
pass the rail dies the death. And all ye who have come to witness a
wedding stay in your seats. We shall e’en have one, since we are come
into the church. But the bride shall choose her own swain!”

Then up rose another great commotion at the door, and four-and-twenty
good bowmen came marching in with Will Stutely at their head. And they
seized the ten liveried archers and the bride’s scowling brother and the
other men on guard and bound them prisoners.

Then in came Allan-a-Dale, decked out gaily, with Will Scarlet for best
man. And they walked gravely down the aisle and stood over against the
chancel.

“Before a maiden weds she chooses--an the laws of good King Harry be
just ones,” said Robin. “Now, maiden, before this wedding continues,
whom will you have to husband?”

The maiden answered not in words, but smiled with a glad light in her
eyes, and walked over to Allan and clasped her arms about his neck.

“That is her true love,” said Robin. “Young Allan instead of the gouty
knight. And the true lovers shall be married at this time before we
depart away. Now my lord Bishop, proceed with the ceremony!”

“Nay, that shall not be,” protested the Bishop; “the banns must be cried
three times in the church. Such is the law of our land.”

“Come here, Little John,” called Robin impatiently; and plucked off the
Bishop’s frock from his back and put it on the yeoman.

Now the Bishop was short and fat, and Little John was long and lean.
The gown hung loosely over Little John’s shoulders and came only to
his waist. He was a fine comical sight, and the people began to laugh
consumedly at him.

“By the faith o’ my body,” said Robin, “this cloth makes you a man.
You’re the finest Bishop that ever I saw in my life. Now cry the banns.”

So Little John clambered awkwardly into the quire, his short gown
fluttering gaily; and he called the banns for the marriage of the maid
and Allan-a-Dale once, twice, and thrice.

“That’s not enough,” said Robin; “your gown is so short that you must
talk longer.”

Then Little John asked them in the church four, five, six, and seven
times.

“Good enough!” said Robin. “Now belike I see a worthy friar in the back
of this church who can say a better service than ever my lord Bishop of
Hereford. My lord Bishop shall be witness and seal the papers, but do
you, good friar, bless this pair with book and candle.”

So Friar Tuck, who all along had been back in one corner of the church,
came forward; and Allan and his maid kneeled before him, while the old
knight, held an unwilling witness, gnashed his teeth in impotent rage;
and the friar began with the ceremony.

When he asked, “Who giveth this woman?” Robin stepped up and answered in
a clear voice:

“I do! I, Robin Hood of Barnesdale and Sherwood! And he who takes her
from Allan-a-Dale shall buy her full dearly.”

So the twain were declared man and wife and duly blessed; and the bride
was kissed by each sturdy yeoman beginning with Robin Hood.

Now I cannot end this jolly tale better than in the words of the ballad
which came out of the happening and which has been sung in the villages
and countryside ever since:

     “And thus having end of this merry wedding,
     The bride lookt like a queen;
     And so they returned to the merry greenwood
     Amongst the leaves so green.”



CHAPTER IX

HOW THE WIDOW’S THREE SONS WERE RESCUED

     Now Robin Hood is to Nottingham gone,
     With a link a down and a down,
     And there he met with the proud Sheriff,
     Was walking along the town.

The wedding-party was a merry one that left Plympton Church, I ween; but
not so merry were the ones left behind. My lord Bishop of Hereford
was stuck up in the organ-loft and left, gownless and fuming. The ten
liveried archers were variously disposed about the church to keep him
company; two of them being locked in a tiny crypt, three in the belfry,
“to ring us a wedding peal,” as Robin said; and the others under
quire seats or in the vestry. The bride’s brother at her entreaty was
released, but bidden not to return to the church that day or interfere
with his sister again on pain of death. While the rusty old knight was
forced to climb a high tree, where he sat insecurely perched among the
branches, feebly cursing the party as it departed.

It was then approaching sundown, but none of the retainers or villagers
dared rescue the imprisoned ones that night, for fear of Robin Hood’s
men. So it was not until sunup the next day, that they were released.
The Bishop and the old knight, stiff as they were, did not delay longer
than for breakfast, but so great was their rage and shame--made straight
to Nottingham and levied the Sheriff’s forces. The Sheriff himself was
not anxious to try conclusions again with Robin in the open. Perhaps he
had some slight scruples regarding his oath. But the others swore that
they would go straight to the King, if he did not help them, so he was
fain to consent.

A force of an hundred picked men from the Royal Foresters and swordsmen
of the shire was gathered together and marched straightway into the
greenwood. There, as fortune would have it, they surprised some score of
outlaws hunting, and instantly gave chase. But they could not surround
the outlaws, who kept well in the lead, ever and anon dropping behind
a log or boulder to speed back a shaft which meant mischief to the
pursuers. One shaft indeed carried off the Sheriff’s hat and caused
that worthy man to fall forward upon his horse’s neck from sheer terror;
while five other arrows landed in the fleshy parts of Foresters’ arms.

But the attacking party was not wholly unsuccessful. One outlaw in his
flight stumbled and fell; when two others instantly stopped and helped
to put him on his feet again. They were the widow’s three sons, Stout
Will, and Lester, and John. The pause was an unlucky one for them, as
a party of Sheriff’s men got above them and cut them off from their
fellows. Swordsmen came up in the rear, and they were soon hemmed in on
every side. But they gave good account of themselves, and before they
had been overborne by force of numbers they had killed two and disabled
three more.

The infuriated attackers were almost on the point of hewing the stout
outlaws to pieces, when the Sheriff cried:

“Hold! Bind the villains! We will follow the law in this and take them
to the town jail. But I promise ye the biggest public hanging that has
been seen in this shire for many changes of the moon!”

So they bound the widow’s three sons and carried them back speedily to
Nottingham.

Now Robin Hood had not chanced to be near the scene of the fight, or
with his men; so for a time he heard nothing of the happening.

But that evening while returning to the camp he was met by the widow
herself, who came weeping along the way.

“What news, what news, good woman?” said Robin hastily but courteously;
for he liked her well.

“God save ye, Master Robin!” said the dame wildly. “God keep ye from the
fate that has met my three sons! The Sheriff has laid hands on them and
they are condemned to die.”

“Now, by our Lady! That cuts me to the heart! Stout Will, and Lester,
and merry John! The earliest friends I had in the band, and still among
the bravest! It must not be! When is this hanging set?”

“Middle the tinker tells me that it is for tomorrow noon,” replied the
dame.

“By the truth o’ my body,” quoth Robin, “you could not tell me in better
time. The memory of the old days when you freely bade me sup and dine
would spur me on, even if three of the bravest lads in all the shire
were not imperiled. Trust to me, good woman!”

The old widow threw herself on the ground and embraced his knees.

“‘Tis dire danger I am asking ye to face,” she said weeping; “and yet I
knew your brave true heart would answer me. Heaven help ye, good Master
Robin, to answer a poor widow’s prayers!”

Then Robin Hood sped straightway to the forest-camp, where he heard the
details of the skirmish--how that his men had been out-numbered five to
one, but got off safely, as they thought, until a count of their members
had shown the loss of the widow’s three sons.

“We must rescue them, my men!” quoth Robin, “even from out the shadow of
the rope itself!”

Whereupon the band set to work to devise ways and means.

Robin walked apart a little way with his head leaned thoughtfully upon
his breast--for he was sore troubled--when whom should he meet but an
old begging palmer, one of a devout order which made pilgrimages and
wandered from place to place, supported by charity.

This old fellow walked boldly up to Robin and asked alms of him; since
Robin had been wont to aid members of his order.

“What news, what news, thou foolish old man?” said Robin, “what news, I
do thee pray?”

“Three squires in Nottingham town,” quoth the palmer, “are condemned
to die. Belike that is greater news than the shire has had in some
Sundays.”

Then Robin’s long-sought idea came to him like a flash.

“Come, change thine apparel with me, old man,” he said, “and I’ll give
thee forty shillings in good silver to spend in beer or wine.”

“O, thine apparel is good,” the palmer protested, “and mine is ragged
and torn. The holy church teaches that thou should’st ne’er laugh an old
man to scorn.”

“I am in simple earnest, I say. Come, change thine apparel with mine.
Here are twenty pieces of good broad gold to feast they brethren right
royally.”

So the palmer was persuaded; and Robin put on the old man’s hat, which
stood full high in the crown; and his cloak, patched with black and
blue and red, like Joseph’s coat of many colors in its old age; and
his breeches, which had been sewed over with so many patterns that the
original was scarce discernible; and his tattered hose; and his shoes,
cobbled above and below. And while as he made the change in dress he
made so many whimsical comments also about a man’s pride and the dress
that makes a man, that the palmer was like to choke with cackling
laughter.

I warrant you, the two were comical sights when they parted company that
day. Nathless, Robin’s own mother would not have known him, had she been
living.

The next morning the whole town of Nottingham was early astir, and as
soon as the gates were open country-folk began to pour in; for a triple
hanging was not held there every day in the week, and the bustle almost
equated a Fair day.

Robin Hood in his palmer’s disguise was one of the first ones to enter
the gates, and he strolled up and down and around the town as though he
had never been there before in all his life. Presently he came to the
market-place, and beheld thereon three gallows erected.

“Who are these builded for, my son?” asked he of a rough soldier
standing by.

“For three of Robin Hood’s men,” answered the other. “And it were Robin
himself, ‘twould be thrice as high I warrant ye. But Robin is too smart
to get within the Sheriff’s clutches again.”

The palmer crossed himself.

“They say that he is a bold fellow,” he whined.

“Ha!” said the soldier, “he may be bold enough out behind stumps i’ the
forest, but the open market-place is another matter.”

“Who is to hang these three poor wretches?” asked the palmer.

“That hath the Sheriff not decided. But here he comes now to answer his
own questions.” And the soldier came to stiff attention as the Sheriff
and his body-guard stalked pompously up to inspect the gallows.

“O, Heaven save you, worshipful Sheriff!” said the palmer. “Heaven
protect you! What will you give a silly old man to-day to be your
hangman?”

“Who are you, fellow?” asked the Sheriff sharply.

“Naught save a poor old palmer. But I can shrive their souls and hang
their bodies most devoutly.”

“Very good,” replied the other. “The fee to-day is thirteen pence; and
I will add thereunto some suits of clothing for that ragged back of
yours.”

“God bless ye!” said the palmer. And he went with the soldier to the
jail to prepare his three men for execution.

Just before the stroke of noon the doors of the prison opened and the
procession of the condemned came forth. Down through the long lines of
packed people they walked to the market-place, the palmer in the lead,
and the widow’s three sons marching firmly erect between soldiers.

At the gallows foot they halted. The palmer whispered to them, as though
offering last words of consolation; and the three men, with arms bound
tightly behind their backs, ascended the scaffold, followed by their
confessor.

Then Robin stepped to the edge of the scaffold, while the people grew
still as death; for they desired to hear the last words uttered to the
victims. But Robin’s voice did not quaver forth weakly, as formerly,
and his figure had stiffened bolt upright beneath the black robe that
covered his rags.

“Hark ye, proud Sheriff!” he cried. “I was ne’er a hangman in all my
life, nor do I now intend to begin that trade. Accurst be he who first
set the fashion of hanging! I have but three more words to say. Listen
to them!”

And forth from the robe he drew his horn and blew three loud blasts
thereon. Then his keen hunting-knife flew forth and in a trice, Stout
Will, Lester, and merry John were free men and had sprung forward and
seized the halberds from the nearest soldiers guarding the gallows.

“Seize them! ‘Tis Robin Hood!” screamed the Sheriff, “an hundred pounds
if ye hold them, dead or alive!”

“I make it two hundred!” roared the fat Bishop.

But their voices were drowned in the uproar that ensued immediately
after Robin blew his horn. He himself had drawn his sword and leaped
down the stairs from the scaffold, followed by his three men. The guard
had closed around them in vain effort to disarm them, when “A rescuer”
 shouted Will Stutely’s clear voice on one side of them, and “A
rescue!” bellowed Little John’s on the other; and down through the
terror-stricken crowd rushed fourscore men in Lincoln green, their force
seeming twice that number in the confusion. With swords drawn they fell
upon the guard from every side at once. There was a brief clash of hot
weapons, then the guard scattered wildly, and Robin Hood’s men formed in
a compact mass around their leader and forced their way slowly down the
market-place.

“Seize them! In the King’s name!” shrieked the Sheriff. “Close the
gates!”

In truth, the peril would have been even greater, had this last order
been carried out. But Will Scarlet and Allan-a-Dale had foreseen that
event, and had already overpowered the two warders.

So the gates stood wide open, and toward them the band of outlaws
headed.

The soldiers rallied a force of twice their number and tried resolutely
to pierce their center. But the retreating force turned thrice and sent
such volleys of keen arrows from their good yew bows, that they kept a
distance between the two forces.

And thus the gate was reached, and the long road leading up the hill,
and at last the protecting greenwood itself. The soldiers dared come no
farther. And the widow’s three sons, I warrant you, supped more heartily
that night than ever before in their whole lives.




CHAPTER X

HOW A BEGGAR FILLED THE PUBLIC EYE

     Good Robin accost him in his way,
     To see what he might be;
     If any beggar had money,
     He thought some part had he.

One bright morning, soon after the stirring events told in the last
chapter, Robin wandered forth alone down the road to Barnesdale, to see
if aught had come of the Sheriff’s pursuit. But all was still and
serene and peaceful. No one was in sight save a solitary beggar who came
sturdily along his way in Robin’s direction. The beggar caught sight
of Robin, at the same moment, as he emerged from the trees, but gave no
sign of having seen him. He neither slackened nor quickened his pace,
but jogged forward merrily, whistling as he came, and beating time by
punching holes in the dusty road with the stout pike-staff in his hand.

The curious look of the fellow arrested Robin’s attention, and he
decided to stop and talk with him. The fellow was bare-legged and
bare-armed, and wore a long shift of a shirt, fastened with a belt.
About his neck hung a stout, bulging bag, which was buckled by a good
piece of leather thong.

     He had three hats upon his head,
     Together sticked fast,
     He cared neither for the wind nor wet,
     In lands where’er he past.

The fellow looked so fat and hearty, and the wallet on his shoulder
seemed so well filled, that Robin thought within himself,

“Ha! this is a lucky beggar for me! If any of them have money, this is
the chap, and, marry, he should share it with us poorer bodies.”

So he flourished his own stick and planted himself in the traveler’s
path.

“Sirrah, fellow!” quoth he; “whither away so fast? Tarry, for I would
have speech with ye!”

The beggar made as though he heard him not, and kept straight on with
his faring.

“Tarry, I say, fellow!” said Robin again; “for there’s a way to make
folks obey!”

“Nay, ‘tis not so,” answered the beggar, speaking for the first time; “I
obey no man in all England, not even the King himself. So let me pass on
my way, for ‘tis growing late, and I have still far to go before I can
care for my stomach’s good.”

“Now, by my troth,” said Robin, once more getting in front of the other,
“I see well by your fat countenance, that you lack not for good food,
while I go hungry. Therefore you must lend me of your means till we meet
again, so that I may hie to the nearest tavern.”

“I have no money to lend,” said the beggar crossly. “Methinks you are as
young a man as I, and as well able to earn a supper. So go your way, and
I’ll go mine. If you fast till you get aught out of me, you’ll go hungry
for the next twelvemonth.”

“Not while I have a stout stick to thwack your saucy bones!” cried
Robin. “Stand and deliver, I say, or I’ll dust your shirt for you; and
if that will not teach you manners, then we’ll see what a broad arrow
can do with a beggar’s skin!”

The beggar smiled, and answered boast with boast. “Come on with your
staff, fellow! I care no more for it than for a pudding stick. And as
for your pretty bow--_that_ for it!”

And with amazing quickness, he swung his pike-staff around and knocked
Robin’s bow clean out of his hand, so that his fingers smarted with
pain. Robin danced and tried to bring his own staff into action; but
the beggar never gave him a chance. Biff! whack! came the pike-staff,
smiting him soundly and beating down his guard.

There were but two things to do; either stand there and take a sound
drubbing, or beat a hasty retreat. Robin chose the latter--as you or I
would probably have done--and scurried back into the wood, blowing his
horn as he went.

“Fie, for shame, man!” jeered the bold beggar after him. “What is your
haste? We had but just begun. Stay and take your money, else you will
never be able to pay your reckoning at the tavern!”

But Robin answered him never a word. He fled up hill and down dale till
he met three of his men who were running up in answer to his summons.

“What is wrong?” they asked.

“‘Tis a saucy beggar,” said Robin, catching his breath. “He is back
there on the highroad with the hardest stick I’ve met in a good many
days. He gave me no chance to reason with him, the dirty scamp!”

The men--Much and two of the widow’s sons--could scarce conceal their
mirth at the thought of Robin Hood running from a beggar. Nathless, they
kept grave faces, and asked their leader if he was hurt.

“Nay,” he replied, “but I shall speedily feel better if you will fetch
me that same beggar and let me have a fair chance at him.”

So the three yeomen made haste and came out upon the highroad and
followed after the beggar, who was going smoothly along his way again,
as though he were at peace with all the world.

“The easiest way to settle this beggar,” said Much, “is to surprise
him. Let us cut through yon neck of woods and come upon him before he is
aware.”

The others agreed to this, and the three were soon close upon their
prey.

“Now!” quoth Much; and the other two sprang quickly upon the beggar’s
back and wrested his pike-staff from his hand. At the same moment Much
drew his dagger and flashed it before the fellow’s breast.

“Yield you, my man!” cried he; “for a friend of ours awaits you in the
wood, to teach you how to fight properly.”

“Give me a fair chance,” said the beggar valiantly, “and I’ll fight you
all at once.”

But they would not listen to him. Instead, they turned him about and
began to march him toward the forest. Seeing that it was useless to
struggle, the beggar began to parley.

“Good my masters,” quoth he, “why use this violence? I will go with ye
safe and quietly, if ye insist, but if ye will set me free I’ll make
it worth your while. I’ve a hundred pounds in my bag here. Let me go my
way, and ye shall have all that’s in the bag.”

The three outlaws took council together at this.

“What say you?” asked Much of the others. “Our master will be more glad
to see this beggar’s wallet than his sorry face.”

The other two agreed, and the little party came to a halt and loosed
hold of the beggar.

“Count out your gold speedily, friend,” said Much. There was a brisk
wind blowing, and the beggar turned about to face it, directly they had
unhanded him.

“It shall be done, gossips,” said he. “One of you lend me your cloak and
we will spread it upon the ground and put the wealth upon it.”

The cloak was handed him, and he placed his wallet upon it as though
it were very heavy indeed. Then he crouched down and fumbled with
the leather fastenings. The outlaws also bent over and watched the
proceeding closely, lest he should hide some of the money on his person.
Presently he got the bag unfastened and plunged his hands into it. Forth
from it he drew--not shining gold--but handfuls of fine meal which he
dashed into the eager faces of the men around him. The wind aided him
in this, and soon there arose a blinding cloud which filled the eyes,
noses, and mouths of the three outlaws till they could scarcely see or
breathe.

While they gasped and choked and sputtered and felt around wildly for
that rogue of a beggar, he finished the job by picking up the cloak
by its corners and shaking it vigorously in the faces of his suffering
victims. Then he seized a stick which lay conveniently near, and began
to rain blows down upon their heads, shoulders, and sides, all the time
dancing first on one leg, then on the other, and crying,

“Villains! rascals! here are the hundred pounds I promised. How do you
like them? I’ faith, you’ll get all that’s in the bag.”

Whack! whack! whack! whack! went the stick, emphasizing each word. Howls
of pain might have gone up from the sufferers, but they had too much
meal in their throats for that. Their one thought was to flee, and they
stumbled off blindly down the road, the beggar following them a little
way to give them a few parting love-taps.

“Fare ye well, my masters,” he said finally turning the other way; “and
when next I come along the Barnesdale road, I hope you will be able to
tell gold from meal dust!”

With this he departed, an easy victor, and again went whistling on his
way, while the three outlaws rubbed the meal out of their eyes and began
to catch their breath again.

As soon as they could look around them clearly, they beheld Robin
Hood leaning against a tree trunk and surveying them smilingly. He had
recovered his own spirits in full measure, on seeing their plight.

“God save ye, gossips!” he said, “ye must, in sooth, have gone the wrong
way and been to the mill, from the looks of your clothes.”

Then when they looked shamefaced and answered never a word, he went on,
in a soft voice,

“Did ye see aught of that bold beggar I sent you for, lately?”

“In sooth, master,” responded Much the miller’s son, “we heard more of
him than we saw him. He filled us so full of meal that I shall sweat
meal for a week. I was born in a mill, and had the smell of meal in my
nostrils from my very birth, you might say, and yet never before did I
see such a quantity of the stuff in so small space.”

And he sneezed violently.

“How was that?” asked Robin demurely.

“Why we laid hold of the beggar, as you did order, when he offered to
pay for his release out of the bag he carried upon his back.”

“The same I coveted,” quoth Robin as if to himself.

“So we agreed to this,” went on Much, “and spread a cloak down, and he
opened his bag and shook it thereon. Instantly a great cloud of meal
filled the air, whereby we could neither see nor breathe; and in the
midst of this cloud he vanished like a wizard.”

“But not before he left certain black and blue spots, to be remembered
by, I see,” commented Robin.

“He was in league with the evil one,” said one of the widow’s sons,
rubbing himself ruefully.

Then Robin laughed outright, and sat him down upon the gnarled root of a
tree, to finish his merriment.

“Four bold outlaws, put to rout by a sorry beggar!” cried he. “I can
laugh at ye, my men, for I am in the same boat with ye. But ‘twould
never do to have this tale get abroad--even in the greenwood--how that
we could not hold our own with the odds in our favor. So let us have
this little laugh all to ourselves, and no one else need be the wiser!”

The others saw the point of this, and felt better directly, despite
their itching desire to get hold of the beggar again. And none of the
four ever told of the adventure.

But the beggar must have boasted of it at the next tavern; or a little
bird perched among the branches of a neighboring oak must have sung
of it. For it got abroad, as such tales will, and was put into a right
droll ballad which, I warrant you, the four outlaws did not like to
hear.




CHAPTER XI

HOW ROBIN HOOD FOUGHT GUY OF GISBORNE

     “I dwell by dale and down,” quoth he,
     “And Robin to take I’m sworn;
     And when I am called by my right name,
     I am Guy of good Gisborne.”

Some weeks passed after the rescue of the widow’s three sons; weeks
spent by the Sheriff in the vain effort to entrap Robin Hood and his
men. For Robin’s name and deeds had come to the King’s ears, in London
town, and he sent word to the Sheriff to capture the outlaw, under
penalty of losing his office. So the Sheriff tried every manner of means
to surprise Robin Hood in the forest, but always without success. And he
increased the price put upon Robin’s head, in the hope that the best men
of the kingdom could be induced to try their skill at a capture.

Now there was a certain Guy of Gisborne, a hireling knight of the King’s
army, who heard of Robin and of the price upon his head. Sir Guy was one
of the best men at the bow and the sword in all the King’s service.
But his heart was black and treacherous. He obtained the King’s leave
forthwith to seek out the forester; and armed with the King’s scroll he
came before the Sheriff at Nottingham.

“I have come to capture Robin Hood,” quoth he, “and mean to have him,
dead or alive.”

“Right gladly would I aid you,” answered the Sheriff, “even if the
King’s seal were not sufficient warrant. How many men need you?”

“None,” replied Sir Guy, “for I am convinced that forces of men can
never come at the bold robber. I must needs go alone. But do you hold
your men in readiness at Barnesdale, and when you hear a blast from this
silver bugle, come quickly, for I shall have the sly Robin within my
clutches.”

“Very good,” said the Sheriff. “Marry, it shall be done.” And he set
about giving orders, while Guy of Gisborne sallied forth disguised.

Now as luck would have it, Will Scarlet and Little John had gone to
Barnesdale that very day to buy suits of Lincoln green for certain of
the yeomen who had come out at the knees and elbows. But not deeming it
best for both of them to run their necks into a noose, together, they
parted just outside the town, and Will went within the gates, while John
tarried and watched at the brow of the hill on the outside.

Presently whom should he see but this same Will flying madly forth from
the gates again, closely pursued by the Sheriff and threescore men. Over
the moat Will sprang, through the bushes and briars, across the swamp,
over stocks and stones, up the woodland roads in long leaps like a
scared jack rabbit. And after him puffed the Sheriff and his men, their
force scattering out in the flight as one man would tumble head-first
into a ditch, another mire up in the swamp, another trip over a rolling
stone, and still others sit down on the roadside and gasp for wind like
fish out of water.

Little John could not forbear laughing heartily at the scene, though
he knew that ‘twould be anything but a laughing matter if Will should
stumble. And in truth one man was like to come upon him. It was
William-a-Trent, the best runner among the Sheriff’s men. He had come
within twenty feet of Scarlet and was leaping upon him with long bounds
like a greyhound, when John rose up quickly, drew his bow and let fly
one of his fatal shafts. It would have been better for William-a-Trent
to have been abed with sorrow--says the ballad--than to be that day in
the greenwood slade to meet with Little John’s arrow. He had run his
last race.

The others halted a moment in consternation, when the shaft came
hurtling down from the hill; but looking up they beheld none save Little
John, and with a cry of fierce joy they turned upon him. Meanwhile Will
Scarlet had reached the brow of the hill and sped down the other side.

“I’ll just send one more little message of regret to the Sheriff,” said
Little John, “before I join Will.”

But this foolhardy deed was his undoing, for just as the arrow left the
string, the good yew bow that had never before failed him snapped in
twain.

“Woe worth, woe worth thee, wicked wood, that ere thou grew on a
tree!” cursed Little John, and planted his feet resolutely in the earth
resolved to sell the path dearly; for the soldiers were now so close
upon him that he dared not turn.

And a right good account of himself he gave that day, dealing with
each man as he came up according to his merit. And so winded were the
pursuers when they reached the top of the hill that he laid out the
first ten of them right and left with huge blows of his brawny fist.

But if five men can do more than three, a score can overcome one.

A body of archers stood off at a prudent distance and covered Little
John with their arrows.

“Now yield you!” panted the Sheriff. “Yield you, Little John, or Reynold
Greenleaf, or whatever else name you carry this day! Yield you, or some
few of these shafts will reach your heart!”

“Marry, my heart has been touched by your words ere now,” said Little
John; “and I yield me.”

So the Sheriff’s men laid hold of Little John and bound him fast with
many cords, so fearful were they lest he should escape. And the Sheriff
laughed aloud in glee, and thought of how he should avenge his stolen
plate, and determined to make a good day’s work of it.

“By the Saints!” he said, “you shall be drawn by dale and down, and
hanged high on a hill in Barnesdale this very day.”

“Hang and be hanged!” retorted the prisoner. “You may fail of your
purpose if it be Heaven’s will.”

Back down the hill and across the moor went the company speedily, for
they feared a rescue. And as they went the stragglers joined them. Here
a man got up feebly out of the ditch and rubbed his pate and fell in
like a chicken with the pip going for its dinner. Yonder came hobbling
a man with a lame ankle, or another with his shins torn by the briars or
another with his jacket all muddy from the marsh. So in truth it was
a tatterdemalion crew that limped and straggled and wandered back into
Barnesdale that day. Yet all were merry, for the Sheriff had promised
them flagons of wine, and moreover they were to hang speedily the
boldest outlaw in England, next to Robin Hood himself.

The gallows was quickly put up and a new rope provided.

“Now up with you!” commanded the Sheriff, “and let us see if your
greenwood tricks will avail you to-morrow.”

“I would that I had bold Robin’s horn,” muttered poor John; “methinks
‘tis all up with me even as the Sheriff hath spoken.”

In good sooth the time was dire and pressing. The rope was placed around
the prisoner’s neck and the men prepared to haul away.

“Are you ready?” called the Sheriff. “One--two--”

But before the “three” left his lips the faint sound of a silver bugle
came floating over the hill.

“By my troth, that is Sir Guy of Gisborne’s horn,” quoth the Sheriff;
“and he bade me not to delay answering its summons. He has caught Robin
Hood.”

“Pardon, Excellency,” said one of his men; “but if he has caught Robin
Hood, this is a merry day indeed. And let us save this fellow and build
another gallows and hang them both together.”

“That’s a brave thought!” said the Sheriff slapping his knee. “Take the
rascal down and bind him fast to the gallows-tree against our return.”

So Little John was made fast to the gallows-tree, while the Sheriff and
all his men who could march or hobble went out to get Robin Hood and
bring him in for the double hanging.

Let us leave talking of Little John and the Sheriff, and see what has
become of Robin Hood.

In the first place, he and Little John had come near having a quarrel
that self-same morning because both had seen a curious looking yeoman,
and each wanted to challenge him singly. But Robin would not give way to
his lieutenant, and that is why John, in a huff, had gone with Will to
Barnesdale.

Meanwhile Robin approached the curious looking stranger. He seemed to be
a three-legged creature at first sight, but on coming nearer you would
have seen that ‘twas really naught but a poorly clad man, who for a
freak had covered up his rags with a capul-hide, nothing more nor less
than the sun-dried skin of a horse, complete with head, tail, and mane.
The skin of the head made a helmet; while the tail gave the curious
three-legged appearance.

“Good-morrow, good fellow,” said Robin cheerily, “methinks by the bow
you bear in your hand that you should be a good archer.”

“Indifferent good,” said the other returning his greeting; “but ‘tis not
of archery that I am thinking this morning, for I have lost my way and
would fain find it again.”

“By my faith, I could have believed ‘twas your wits you’d lost!” thought
Robin smiling. Then aloud: “I’ll lead you through the wood,” quoth
he, “an you will tell me your business. For belike your speech is much
gentler than your attire.”

“Who are you to ask me my business?” asked the other roughly.

“I am one of the King’s Rangers,” replied Robin, “set here to guard his
deer against curious looking strollers.”

“Curious looking I may be,” returned the other, “but no stroller. Hark
ye, since you are a Ranger, I must e’en demand your service. I am on the
King’s business and seek an outlaw. Men call him Robin Hood. Are you one
of his men?”--eyeing him keenly.

“Nay, God forbid!” said Robin; “but what want you with him?”

“That is another tale. But I’d rather meet with that proud outlaw than
forty good pounds of the King’s money.”

Robin now saw how the land lay.

“Come with me, good yeoman,” said he, “and belike, a little later in the
day, I can show you Robin’s haunts when he is at home. Meanwhile let us
have some pastime under the greenwood tree. Let us first try the mastery
at shooting arrows.”

The other agreed, and they cut down two willow wands of a summer’s
growth that grew beneath a brier, and set them up at a distance of
threescore yards.

“Lead on, good fellow,” quoth Robin. “The first shot to you.”

“Nay, by my faith,” said the other, “I will follow your lead.”

So Robin stepped forth and bent his bow carelessly and sent his
shaft whizzing toward the wand, missing it by a scant inch. He of the
horse-hide followed with more care yet was a good three-fingers’ breadth
away. On the second round, the stranger led off and landed cleverly
within the small garland at the top of the wand; but Robin shot far
better and clave the wand itself, clean at the middle.

“A blessing on your heart!” shouted Capul-Hide; “never saw I such
shooting as that! Belike you are better than Robin Hood himself. But you
have not yet told me your name.”

“Nay, by my faith,” quoth Robin, “I must keep it secret till you have
told me your own.”

“I do not disdain to tell it,” said the other. “I dwell by dale and
down, and to take bold Robin am I sworn. This would I tell him to his
face, were he not so great a craven. When I am called by my right name,
I am Guy of Gisborne.”

This he said with a great show of pride, and he strutted back and forth,
forgetful that he had just been beaten at archery.

Robin eyed him quietly. “Methinks I have heard of you elsewhere. Do you
not bring men to the gallows for a living?”

“Aye, but only outlaws such as Robin Hood.”

“But pray what harm has Robin Hood done you?”

“He is a highway robber,” said Sir Guy, evading the question.

“Has he ever taken from the rich that he did not give again to the
poor? Does he not protect the women and children and side with weak and
helpless? Is not his greatest crime the shooting of a few King’s deer?”

“Have done with your sophistry,” said Sir Guy impatiently. “I am more
than ever of opinion that you are one of Robin’s men yourself.”

“I have told you I am not,” quoth Robin briefly. “But if I am to help
you catch him, what is your plan?”

“Do you see this silver bugle?” said the other. “A long blast upon it
will summon the Sheriff and all his men, when once I have Robin within
my grasp. And if you show him to me, I’ll give you the half of my forty
pounds reward.”

“I would not help hang a man for ten times forty pounds,” said the
outlaw. “Yet will I point out Robin to you for the reward I find at my
sword’s point. I myself am Robin Hood of Sherwood and Barnesdale.”

“Then have at you!” cried the other springing swiftly into action. His
sword leaped forth from beneath the horse’s hide with the speed born of
long practice, and before Robin had come to guard, the other had smitten
at him full and foul. Robin eluded the lunge and drew his own weapon.

“A scurvy trick!” quoth he grimly, “to strike at a man unprepared.”

Then neither spoke more, but fell sternly to work--lunge and thrust and
ward and parry--for two full hours the weapons smote together sullenly,
and neither Robin Hood nor Sir Guy would yield an inch. I promise you
that if you could have looked forth on the fight from behind the trunk
of some friendly tree, you would have seen deadly sport such as few
men beheld in Sherwood Forest. For the fighters glared sullenly at each
other, the fires of hatred burning in their eyes. One was fighting for
his life; the other for a reward and the King’s favor.

Still circled the bright blades swiftly in the air--now gleaming in the
peaceful sunlight--again hissing like maddened serpents. Neither had yet
touched the other, until Robin, in an unlucky moment, stumbled over
the projecting root of a tree; when Sir Guy, instead of giving him the
chance to recover himself, as any courteous knight would have done,
struck quickly at the falling man and wounded him in the left side.

“Ah, dear Lady in Heaven,” gasped Robin uttering his favorite prayer,
“shield me now! ‘Twas never a man’s destiny to die before his day.”

And adroitly he sprang up again, and came straight at the other with an
awkward but unexpected stroke. The knight had raised his weapon high to
give a final blow, when Robin reached beneath and across his guard.
One swift lunge, and Sir Guy of Gisborne staggered backward with a deep
groan, Robin’s sword through his throat.

Robin looked at the slain man regretfully.

“You did bring it upon yourself,” said he; “and traitor and hireling
though you were, I would not willingly have killed you.”

He looked to his own wound. It was not serious, and he soon staunched
the blood and bound up the cut. Then he dragged the dead body into the
bushes, and took off the horse’s hide and put it upon himself. He placed
his own cloak upon Sir Guy, and marked his face so none might tell who
had been slain. Robin’s own figure and face were not unlike the other’s.

Pulling the capul-hide well over himself, so that the helmet hid most
of his face, Robin seized the silver bugle and blew a long blast. It was
the blast that saved the life of Little John, over in Barnesdale, for
you and I have already seen how it caused the fond Sheriff to prick up
his ears and stay the hanging, and go scurrying up over the hill and
into the wood with his men in search of another victim.

In five-and-twenty minutes up came running a score of the Sheriff’s best
archers.

“Did you signal us, lording?” they asked, approaching Robin.

“Aye,” said he, going to meet the puffing Sheriff.

“What news, what news, Sir Guy?” said that officer.

“Robin Hood and Guy of Gisborne had a fight; and he that wears Robin’s
cloak lies under the covert yonder.”

“The best news I have heard in all my life!” exclaimed the Sheriff
rubbing his hands. “I would that we could have saved him for the
hanging--though I cannot now complain.”

“The hanging?” repeated Robin.

“Yes. This is our lucky day on the calendar. After you left me we
narrowly missed running one of the fellows--I believe ‘twas Will
Scarlet--to earth; and another who came to his relief we were just about
to hang, when your horn blew.”

“Who was the other?” asked the disguised outlaw.

“Whom do you suppose?” laughed the Sheriff. “The best man in the
greenwood, next to Robin Hood himself--Little John, Reynold Greenleaf!”
 For the Sheriff could not forget the name Little John had borne under
his own roof at Nottingham.

“Little John!” thought Robin with a start. Verily that was a lucky
blast of the bugle! “But I see you have not escaped without a scratch,”
 continued the Sheriff, becoming talkative through pure glee. “Here, one
of you men! Give Sir Guy of Gisborne your horse; while others of you
bury that dog of an outlaw where he lies. And let us hasten back to
Barnesdale and finish hanging the other.”

So they put spurs to their horses, and as they rode Robin forced himself
to talk merrily, while all the time he was planning the best way to
succor Little John.

“A boon, Sheriff,” he said as they reached the gates of the town.

“What is it, worthy sir? You have but to speak.”

“I do not want any of your gold, for I have had a brave fight. But now
that I have slain the master, let me put an end to the man; so it shall
be said that Guy of Gisborne despatched the two greatest outlaws of
England in one day.”

“Have it as you will,” said the Sheriff, “but you should have asked a
knight’s fee and double your reward, and it would have been yours. It
isn’t every man that can take Robin Hood.” “No, Excellency,” answered
Robin. “I say it without boasting, that no man took Robin Hood yesterday
and none shall take him to-morrow.”

Then he approached Little John, who was still tied to the gallows-tree;
and he said to the Sheriff’s men, “Now stand you back here till I see if
the prisoner has been shrived.” And he stooped swiftly, and cut Little
John’s bonds, and thrust into his hands Sir Guy’s bow and arrows, which
he had been careful to take.

“‘Tis I, Robin!” he whispered. But in truth, Little John knew it
already, and had decided there was to be no hanging that day.

Then Robin blew three loud blasts upon his own horn, and drew forth his
own bow; and before the astonished Sheriff and his men could come to
arms the arrows were whistling in their midst in no uncertain fashion.

And look! Through the gates and over the walls came pouring another
flight of arrows! Will Scarlet and Will Stutely had watched and planned
a rescue ever since the Sheriff and Robin rode back down the hill. Now
in good time they came; and the Sheriff’s demoralized force turned tail
and ran, while Robin and Little John stood under the harmless gallows,
and sped swift arrows after them, and laughed to see them go.

Then they joined their comrades and hasted back to the good greenwood,
and there rested. They had got enough sport for one day.




CHAPTER XII

HOW MAID MARIAN CAME BACK TO SHERWOOD FOREST; ALSO, HOW ROBIN HOOD CAME
BEFORE QUEEN ELEANOR.

     But Robin Hood, he himself had disguis’d,
     And Marian was strangely attir’d,
     That they proved foes, and so fell to blows,
     Whose valor bold Robin admir’d.

     And when he came at London’s court,
     He fell down on his knee.
     “Thou art welcome, Lockesley,” said the Queen,
     “And all thy good yeomandree.”

Now it fell out that one day not long thereafter, Robin was minded to
try his skill at hunting. And not knowing whom he might meet in his
rambles, he stained his face and put on a sorry-looking jacket and a
long cloak before he sallied forth. As he walked, the peacefulness of
the morning came upon him, and brought back to his memory the early days
so long ago when he had roamed these same glades with Marian. How sweet
they seemed to him now, and how far away! Marian, too, the dainty friend
of his youth--would he ever see her again? He had thought of her very
often of late, and each time with increasing desire to hear her clear
voice and musical laugh, and see her eyes light up at his coming.

Perhaps the happiness of Allen-a-Dale and his lady had caused Robin’s
heart-strings to vibrate more strongly; perhaps, too, the coming of
Will Scarlet. But, certes, Robin was anything but a hunter this bright
morning as he walked along with head drooping in a most love-lorn way.

Presently a hart entered the glade in full view of him, grazing
peacefully, and instantly the man of action awoke. His bow was drawn
and a shaft all but loosed, when the beast fell suddenly, pierced by a
clever arrow from the far side of the glade.

Then a handsome little page sprang gleefully from the covert and ran
toward the dying animal. This was plainly the archer, for he flourished
his bow aloft, and likewise bore a sword at his side, though for all
that he looked a mere lad.

Robin approached the hart from the other side.

“How dare you shoot the King’s beasts, stripling?” he asked severely.

“I have as much right to shoot them as the King himself,” answered the
page haughtily. “How dare you question me?”

The voice stirred Robin strongly. It seemed to chime into his memories
of the old days. He looked at the page sharply, and the other returned
the glance, straight and unafraid.

“Who are you, my lad?” Robin said more civilly.

“No lad of yours, and my name’s my own,” retorted the other with spirit.

“Softly! Fair and softly, sweet page, or we of the forest will have to
teach you manners!” said Robin.

“Not if _you_ stand for the forest!” cried the page, whipping out his
sword. “Come, draw, and defend yourself!”

He swung his blade valiantly; and Robin saw nothing for it but to draw
likewise. The page thereupon engaged him quite fiercely, and Robin found
that he had many pretty little tricks at fencing.

Nathless, Robin contented himself with parrying, and was loth to exert
all his superior strength upon the lad. So the fight lasted for above a
quarter of an hour, at the end of which time the page was almost spent
and the hot blood flushed his cheeks in a most charming manner.

The outlaw saw his distress, and to end the fight allowed himself to be
pricked slightly on the wrist.

“Are you satisfied, fellow?” asked the page, wincing a little at sight
of the blood.

“Aye, honestly,” replied Robin; “and now perhaps you will grant me the
honor of knowing to whom I owe this scratch?”

“I am Richard Partington, page to Her Majesty, Queen Eleanor,” answered
the lad with dignity; and again the sound of his voice troubled Robin
sorely.

“Why come you to the greenwood alone, Master Partington?”

The lad considered his answer while wiping his sword with a small lace
kerchief. The action brought a dim confused memory to Robin. The lad
finally looked him again in the eye.

“Forester, whether or no you be a King’s man, know that I seek one Robin
Hood, an outlaw, to whom I bring amnesty from the Queen. Can you tell me
aught of him?” And while awaiting his answer, he replaced the kerchief
in his shirt. As he did so, the gleam of a golden trophy caught the
outlaw’s eye.

Robin started forward with a joyful cry.

“Ah! I know you now! By the sight of yon golden arrow won at the
Sheriff’s tourney, you are she on whom I bestowed it, and none other
than Maid Marian!”

“You--are--?” gasped Marian, for it was she; “not Robin!”

“Robin’s self!” said he gaily; and forthwith, clad as he was in rags,
and stained of face, he clasped the dainty page close to his breast, and
she forsooth yielded right willingly.

“But Robin!” she exclaimed presently, “I knew you not, and was rude, and
wounded you!”

“‘Twas nothing,” he replied laughingly, “so long as it brought me you.”

But she made more ado over the sore wrist than Robin had received for
all his former hurts put together. And she bound it with the little
kerchief, and said, “Now ‘twill get well!” and Robin was convinced she
spoke the truth, for he never felt better in all his life. The whole
woods seemed tinged with a roseate hue, since Marian had come again.

But she, while happy also, was ill at ease; and Robin with a man’s slow
discernment at last saw that it was because of her boy’s attire. He
thought bluntly that there was naught to be ashamed of, yet smilingly
handed her his tattered long cloak, which she blushingly put on, and
forthwith recovered her spirits directly.

Then they began to talk of each other’s varied fortunes, and of the many
things which had parted them; and so much did they find to tell that the
sun had begun to decline well into the afternoon before they realized
how the hours sped.

“I am but a sorry host!” exclaimed Robin, springing to his feet. “I have
not once invited you to my wild roof.”

“And I am but a sorry page,” replied Marian; “for I had clean forgot
that I was Richard Partington, and really did bring you a message from
Queen Eleanor!”

“Tell me on our way home, and there you shall be entrusted to Mistress
Dale. While the first of my men we meet will I send back for your deer.”

So she told him, as they walked back through the glade, how that the
fame of his prowess had reached Queen Eleanor’s ears, in London town.
And the Queen had said, “Fain would I see this bold yeoman, and behold
his skill at the long-bow.” And the Queen had promised him amnesty if
he and four of his archers would repair to London against the next
tournament the week following, there to shoot against King Henry’s
picked men, of whom the King was right vain. All this Marian told in
detail, and added:

“When I heard Her Majesty say she desired to see you, I asked leave
to go in search of you, saying I had known you once. And the Queen was
right glad, and bade me go, and sent this gold ring to you from off her
finger, in token of her faith.”

Then Robin took the ring and bowed his head and kissed it loyally. “By
this token will I go to London town,” quoth he, “and ere I part with
the Queen’s pledge, may the hand that bears it be stricken off at the
wrist!” By this time they were come to the grove before the cave,
and Robin presented Maid Marian to the band, who treated her with the
greatest respect. Will Scarlet was especially delighted to greet again
his old time friend, while Allan-a-Dale and his good wife bustled about
to make her welcome in their tiny thatched cottage.

That evening after they had supped royally upon the very hart that
Marian had slain, Allan sang sweet songs of Northern minstrelsy to the
fair guest as she sat by Robin’s side, the golden arrow gleaming in
her dark hair. The others all joined in the chorus, from Will Scarlet’s
baritone to Friar Tuck’s heavy bass. Even Little John essayed to sing,
although looked at threateningly by Much the miller’s son.

Then Robin bade Marian repeat her message from the Queen, which Marian
did in a way befitting the dignity of her royal mistress. After which
the yeomen gave three cheers for the Queen and three more for her page,
and drank toasts to them both, rising to their feet.

“Ye have heard,” quoth Robin standing forth, “how that Her Majesty--whom
God preserve!--wishes but four men to go with me. Wherefore, I choose
Little John and Will Stutely, my two lieutenants, Will Scarlet, my
cousin, and Allan-a-Dale, my minstrel. Mistress Dale, also, can go with
her husband and be company for the Queen’s page. We will depart with
early morning, decked in our finest. So stir ye, my lads! and see that
not only your tunics are fresh, but your swords bright and your bows
and arrows fit. For we must be a credit to the Queen as well as the good
greenwood. You, Much, with Stout Will, Lester, and John, the widow’s
three sons, shall have command of the band while we are away; and Friar
Tuck shall preside over the needs of your souls and stomachs.”

The orders were received with shouts of approval, and toasts all around
were drunk again in nut-brown ale, ere the company dispersed to rest
after making ready for the journey.

The next morning was as fine a summer’s day as ever you want to see, and
the green leaves of the forest made a pleasing background for the gay
picture of the yeomen setting forth. Says the old ballad--it was a
seemly sight to see how Robin Hood himself had dressed, and all his
yeomanry. He clothed his men in Lincoln green, and himself in scarlet
red, with hats of black and feathers white to bravely deck each head.
Nor were the two ladies behind-hand, I ween, at the bedecking.

Thus the chosen party of seven sallied forth being accompanied to the
edge of the wood by the whole band, who gave them a merry parting and
Godspeed!

The journey to London town was made without incident. The party
proceeded boldly along the King’s highroad, and no man met them who was
disposed to say them nay. Besides, the good Queen’s warrant and ring
would have answered for them, as indeed it did at the gates of London.
So on they sped and in due course came to the palace itself and awaited
audience with the Queen.

Now the King had gone that day to Finsbury Field, where the tourney was
soon to be held, in order to look over the lists and see some of his
picked men whom he expected to win against all comers. So much had he
boasted of these men, that the Queen had secretly resolved to win a
wager of him. She had heard of the fame of Robin Hood and his yeomen, as
Marian had said; and Marian on her part had been overjoyed to be able to
add a word in their favor and to set out in search of them.

To-day the Queen sat in her private audience-room chatting pleasantly
with her ladies, when in came Mistress Marian Fitzwalter attired again
as befitted her rank of lady-in-waiting. She courtesied low to the Queen
and awaited permission to speak.

“How now!” said the Queen smiling; “is this my lady Marian, or the page,
Richard Partington?”

“Both, an it please Your Majesty. Richard found the man you sought,
while Marian brought him to you.”

“Where is he?” asked Queen Eleanor eagerly.

“Awaiting your audience--he and four of his men, likewise a lady of
whose wooing and wedding I can tell you a pretty story at another time.”

“Have them admitted.”

So Marian gave orders to a herald, and presently Robin Hood and his
little party entered the room.

Now the Queen had half-expected the men to be rude and uncouth in
appearance, because of their wild life in the forest; but she was
delightfully disappointed. Indeed she started back in surprise and
almost clapped her hands. For, sooth to say, the yeomen made a brave
sight, and in all the court no more gallant men could be found. Marian
felt her cheeks glow with pride, at sight of the half-hidden looks of
admiration sent forth by the other ladies-in-waiting.

Robin had not forgot the gentle arts taught by his mother, and he wore
his fine red velvet tunic and breeches with the grace of a courtier.
We have seen, before, what a dandified gentleman Will Scarlet was; and
Allan-a-Dale, the minstrel, was scarcely less goodly to look upon.
While the giant Little John and broad-shouldered Will Stutely made up in
stature what little they lacked in outward polish. Mistress Dale, on her
part, looked even more charming, if possible, than on the momentous day
when she went to Plympton Church to marry one man and found another.

Thus came the people of the greenwood before Queen Eleanor, in her own
private audience room. And Robin advanced and knelt down before her, and
said:

“Here I am, Robin Hood--I and my chosen men! At Your Majesty’s bidding
am I come, bearing the ring of amnesty which I will protect--as I would
protect Your Majesty’s honor--with my life!”

“Thou art welcome, Lockesley,” said the Queen smiling graciously.

“Thou art come in good time, thou and all thy brave yeomanry.”

Then Robin presented each of his men in turn, and each fell on his
knee and was greeted with most kindly words. And the Queen kissed fair
Mistress Dale upon the cheek, and bade her remain in the palace with her
ladies while she was in the city. And she made all the party be seated
to rest themselves after their long journey. Fine wines were brought,
and cake, and rich food, for their refreshment. And as they ate and
drank, the Queen told them further of the tourney to be held at Finsbury
Field, and of how she desired them to wear her colors and shoot for her.
Meantime, she concluded, they were to lie by quietly and be known of no
man.

To do all this, Robin and his men pledged themselves full heartily. Then
at the Queen’s request, they related to her and her ladies some of their
merry adventures; whereat the listeners were vastly entertained, and
laughed heartily. Then Marian, who had heard of the wedding at Plympton
Church, told it so drolly that tears stood in the Queen’s eyes from
merriment.

“My lord Bishop of Hereford!” she said, “‘Twas indeed a comical business
for him! I shall keep that to twit his bones, I promise you! So this is
our minstrel?” she added presently, turning to Allan-a-Dale. “Methinks I
have already heard of him. Will he not harp awhile for us to-day?”

Allan bowed low, and took a harp which was brought to him, and he
thrummed the strings and sang full sweetly the border songs of the North
Countree. And the Queen and all her ladies listened in rapt silence till
all the songs were ended.




CHAPTER XIII

HOW THE OUTLAWS SHOT IN KING HARRY’S TOURNEY

     The King is into Finsbury Field
     Marching in battle ‘ray,
     And after follows bold Robin Hood,
     And all his yeomen gay.

The morning of the great archery contest dawned fair and bright,
bringing with it a fever of impatience to every citizen of London town,
from the proudest courtier to the lowest kitchen wench. Aye, and all the
surrounding country was early awake, too, and began to wend their way to
Finsbury Field, a fine broad stretch of practice ground near Moorfields.
Around three sides of the Field were erected tier upon tier of seats,
for the spectators, with the royal boxes and booths for the nobility
and gentry in the center. Down along one end were pitched gaily colored
tents for the different bands of King’s archers. There were ten of
these bands, each containing a score of men headed by a captain of great
renown; so to-day there were ten of the pavilions, each bearing aloft
the Royal Arms and vari-colored pennants which fluttered lightly in the
fresh morning breeze.

Each captain’s flag was of peculiar color and device. First came the
royal purple streamer of Tepus, own bow-bearer to the King, and esteemed
the finest archer in all the land. Then came the yellow of Clifton of
Buckinghamshire; and the blue of Gilbert of the White Hand--he who was
renowned in Nottinghamshire; and the green of Elwyn the Welshman; and
the White of Robert of Cloudesdale; and, after them, five other captains
of bands, each a man of proved prowess. As the Queen had said aforetime,
the King was mightily proud of his archers, and now held this tourney to
show their skill and, mayhap, to recruit their forces.

The uprising tiers of seats filled early, upon this summer morning, and
the merry chatter of the people went abroad like the hum of bees in a
hive. The royal party had not yet put in an appearance, nor were any
of the King’s archers visible. So the crowd was content to hide its
impatience by laughing jibes passed from one section to another, and
crying the colors of their favorite archers. In and out among the seats
went hawkers, their arms laden with small pennants to correspond with
the rival tents. Other vendors of pie and small cakes and cider also did
a thrifty business, for so eager had some of the people been to get good
seats, that they had rushed away from home without their breakfast.

Suddenly the gates at the far end, next the tents, opened wide, and a
courier in scarlet and gold, mounted upon a white horse, rode in
blowing lustily upon the trumpet at his lips; and behind him came six
standard-bearers riding abreast. The populace arose with a mighty cheer.
King Harry had entered the arena. He bestrode a fine white charger
and was clad in a rich dark suit of slashed velvet with satin and gold
facings. His hat bore a long curling ostrich plume of pure white and he
doffed it graciously in answer to the shouts of the people. By his
side rode Queen Eleanor, looking regal and charming in her long brocade
riding-habit; while immediately behind them came Prince Richard and
Prince John, each attired in knightly coats of mail and helmets. Lords
and ladies of the realm followed; and finally, the ten companies of
archers, whose progress round the field was greeted with hardly less
applause than that given the King himself.

The King and Queen dismounted from their steeds, ascended the steps
of the royal box, and seated themselves upon two thrones, decked with
purple and gold trapping, upon a dais sheltered by striped canvas. In
the booths at each side the members of the Court took their places;
while comely pages ran hither and thither bearing the royal commands.
‘Twas a lordly sight, I ween, this shifting of proud courtiers, flashing
of jeweled fans, and commingling of bright colors with costly gems!

Now the herald arose to command peace, and soon the clear note of his
bugle rose above the roar of the crowd and hushed it to silence. The
tenscore archers ranged themselves in two long rows on each side of
the lists--a gallant array--while their captains, as a special mark of
favor, stood near the royal box.

“Come hither, Tepus,” said the King to his bow-bearer. “Come, measure me
out this line, how long our mark must be.”

“What is the reward?” then asked the Queen.

“That will the herald presently proclaim,” answered the King. “For first
prize we have offered a purse containing twoscore golden pounds; for
second, a purse containing twoscore silver pennies; and for third a
silver bugle, inlaid with gold. Moreover, if the King’s companies keep
these prizes, the winning companies shall have, first, two tuns of
Rhenish wine; second, two tuns of English beer; and, third, five of
the fattest harts that run on Dallom Lea. Methinks that is a princely
wager,” added King Harry laughingly.

Up spake bold Clifton, secure in the King’s favor. “Measure no marks for
us, most sovereign liege,” quoth he; “for such largess as that, we’ll
shoot at the sun and the moon.”

“‘Twill not be so far as that,” said the King. “But get a line of good
length, Tepus, and set up the targets at tenscore paces.”

Forthwith, Tepus bowed low, and set up ten targets, each bearing the
pennant of a different company, while the herald stood forth again and
proclaimed the rules and prizes. The entries were open to all comers.
Each man, also, of the King’s archers should shoot three arrows at the
target bearing the colors of his band, until the best bowman in each
band should be chosen. These ten chosen archers should then enter a
contest for an open target--three shots apiece--and here any other
bowman whatsoever was asked to try his skill. The result at the open
targets should decide the tourney.

Then all the people shouted again, in token that the terms of the
contest pleased them; and the archers waved their bows aloft, and
wheeled into position facing their respective targets.

The shooting now began, upon all the targets at once, and the multitude
had so much ado to watch them, that they forgot to shout. Besides,
silence was commanded during the shooting. Of all the fine shooting that
morning, I have not now space to tell you. The full score of men shot
three times at each target, and then three times again to decide a tie.
For, more than once, the arrow shot by one man would be split wide
open by his successor. Every man’s shaft bore his number to ease the
counting; and so close would they stick at the end of a round, that the
target looked like a big bristle hairbrush. Then must the spectators
relieve their tense spirits by great cheering; while the King looked
mighty proud of his skilled bowmen.

At last the company targets were decided, and Tepus, as was expected,
led the score, having made six exact centers in succession. Gilbert
of the White Hand followed with five, and Clifton with four. Two other
captains had touched their center four times, but not roundly. While in
the other companies it so chanced that the captains had been out-shot by
some of the men under them.

The winners then saluted the King and Queen, and withdrew for a space to
rest and renew their bow-strings for the keenest contest of all; while
the lists were cleared and a new target--the open one--was set up at
twelvescore paces. At the bidding of the King, the herald announced
that the open target was to be shot at, to decide the title of the best
archer in all England; and any man there present was privileged to try
for it. But so keen had been the previous shooting, that many yeomen who
had come to enter the lists now would not do so; and only a dozen men
stepped forth to give in their names.

“By my halidom!” said the King, “these must be hardy men to pit
themselves against my archers!”

“Think you that your ten chosen fellows are the best bowmen in all
England?” asked the Queen.

“Aye, and in all the world beside,” answered the King; “and thereunto I
would stake five hundred pounds.”

“I am minded to take your wager,” said the Queen musingly, “and will
e’en do so if you grant me a boon.”

“What is it?” asked the King.

“If I produce five archers who can out-shoot your ten, will you grant my
men full grace and amnesty?”

“Assuredly!” quoth the King in right good humor. “Nathless, I tell you
now, your wager is in jeopardy, for there never were such bowmen as
Tepus and Clifton and Gilbert!”

“Hum!” said the Queen puckering her brow, still as though lost in
thought. “I must see if there be none present to aid me in my wager.
Boy, call hither Sir Richard of the Lea and my lord Bishop of Hereford!”

The two summoned ones, who had been witnessing the sport, came forward.

“Sir Richard,” said she, “thou art a full knight and good. Would’st
advise me to meet a wager of the King’s, that I can produce other
archers as good as Tepus and Gilbert and Clifton?”

“Nay, Your Majesty,” he said, bending his knee. “There be none present
that can match them. Howbeit,”--he added dropping his voice--“I have
heard of some who lie hid in Sherwood Forest who could show them strange
targets.”

The Queen smiled and dismissed him.

“Come hither, my lord Bishop of Hereford,” quoth she, “would’st thou
advance a sum to support my wager ‘gainst the King?”

“Nay, Your Majesty,” said the fat Bishop, “an you pardon me, I’d not lay
down a penny on such a bet. For by my silver mitre, the King’s archers
are men who have no peers.”

“But suppose I found men whom _thou knewest_ to be masters at the bow,”
 she insisted roguishly, “would’st thou not back them? Belike, I have
heard that there be men round about Nottingham and Plympton who carry
such matters with a high hand!”

The Bishop glanced nervously around, as if half expecting to see Robin
Hood’s men standing near; then turned to find the Queen looking at him
with much amusement lurking in her eyes.

“Odds bodikins! The story of my misadventure must have preceded me!” he
thought, ruefully. Aloud he said, resolved to face it out,

“Your Majesty, such tales are idle and exaggerated. An you pardon me, I
would add to the King’s wager that his men are invincible.”

“As it pleases thee,” replied the Queen imperturbably. “How much?”

“Here is my purse,” said the Bishop uneasily. “It contains fifteen score
nobles, or near a hundred pounds.”

“I’ll take it at even money,” she said, dismissing him; “and Your
Majesty”--turning to the King who had been conversing with the two
princes and certain of the nobles--“I accept your wager of five hundred
pounds.”

“Very good,” said the King, laughing as though it were a great jest.
“But what had minded you to take such interest in the sport, of a
sudden?”

“It is as I have said. I have found five men whom I will pit against any
you may produce.”

“Then we will try their skill speedily,” quoth the King. “How say you,
if first we decide this open target and then match the five best thereat
against your unknown champions?”

“Agreed,” said the Queen. Thereupon she signed to Maid Marian to
step forward, from a near-by booth where she sat with other
ladies-in-waiting, and whispered something in her ear. Marian courtesied
and withdrew.

Now the ten chosen archers from the King’s bands came forth again and
took their stand; and with them stood forth the twelve untried men from
the open lists. Again the crowd was stilled, and every eye hung upon the
speeding of the shafts. Slowly but skilfully each man shot, and as
his shaft struck within the inner ring a deep breath broke from the
multitude like the sound of the wind upon the seashore. And now Gilbert
of the White Hand led the shooting, and ‘twas only by the space of a
hairsbreadth upon the line that Tepus tied his score. Stout Elwyn, the
Welshman, took third place; one of the private archers, named Geoffrey,
come fourth; while Clifton must needs content himself with fifth.

The men from the open lists shot fairly true, but nervousness and fear
of ridicule wrought their undoing.

The herald then came forward again, and, instead of announcing the
prize-winners, proclaimed that there was to be a final contest. Two
men had tied for first place, declared His Majesty the King, and three
others were entitled to honors. Now all these five were to shoot
again, and they were to be pitted against five other of the Queen’s
choosing--men who had not yet shot upon that day.

A thrill of astonishment and excitement swept around the arena. “Who
were these men of the Queen’s choosing?” was upon every lip. The hubbub
of eager voices grew intense; and in the midst of it all, the gate at
the far end of the field opened and five men entered and escorted a lady
upon horseback across the arena to the royal box. The lady was instantly
recognized as Mistress Marian of the Queen’s household, but no one
seemed to know the faces of her escort. Four were clad in Lincoln green,
while the fifth, who seemed to be the leader, was dressed in a brave
suit of scarlet red. Each man wore a close fitting cap of black, decked
with a curling white feather. For arms, they carried simply a stout bow,
a sheaf of new arrows, and a short hunting-knife.

When the little party came before the dais on which the King and Queen
sat, the yeomen doffed their caps humbly, while Maid Marian was assisted
to dismount.

“Your Gracious Majesty,” she said, addressing the Queen, “these be the
men for whom you sent me, and who are now come to wear your colors and
service you in the tourney.”

The Queen leaned forward and handed them each a scarf of green and gold.

“Lockesley,” she said in a clear voice, “I thank thee and thy men for
this service. Know that I have laid a wager with the King that ye can
outshoot the best five whom he has found in all his bowmen.” The five
men pressed the scarfs to their lips in token of fealty.

The King turned to the Queen inquiringly.

“Who are these men you have brought before us?” asked he.

Up came the worthy Bishop of Hereford, growing red and pale by turns.

“Your pardon, my liege lord!” cried he; “But I must denounce these
fellows as outlaws. Yon man in scarlet is none other than Robin Hood
himself. The others are Little John and Will Stutely and Will Scarlet
and Allan-a-Dale--all famous in the North Countree for their deeds of
violence.”

“As my lord Bishop personally knows!” added the Queen significantly.

The King’s brows grew dark. The name of Robin Hood was well known to
him, as to every man there present.

“Is this true?” he demanded sternly.

“Aye, my lord,” responded the Queen demurely. “But, bethink you--I have
your royal promise of grace and amnesty.”

“That will I keep,” said the King, holding in check his ire by a mighty
effort. “But, look you! Only forty days do I grant of respite. When this
time has elapsed, let these bold outlaws look to their safety!”

Then turning to his five victorious archers, who had drawn near, he
added, “Ye have heard, my men, how that I have a wager with the Queen
upon your prowess. Now here be men of her choosing--certain free shafts
of Sherwood and Barnesdale. Wherefore look well to it, Gilbert and Tepus
and Geoffrey and Elwyn and Clifton! If ye outshoot these knaves, I will
fill your caps with silver pennies--aye, and knight the man who stands
first. But if ye lose, I give the prizes, for which ye have just
striven, to Robin Hood and his men, according to my royal word.”

“Robin Hood and his men!” the saying flew round the arena with the speed
of wild-fire, and every neck craned forward to see the famous fellows
who had dared to brave the King’s anger, because of the Queen.

Another target was now set up, at the same distance as the last, and
it was decided that the ten archers should shoot three arrows in turn.
Gilbert and Robin tossed up a penny for the lead, and it fell to the
King’s men. So Clifton was bidden to shoot first.

Forth he stood, planting his feet firmly, and wetting his fingers before
plucking the string. For he was resolved to better his losing score of
that day. And in truth he did so, for the shaft he loosed sped true, and
landed on the black bull’s-eye, though not in the exact center. Again he
shot, and again he hit the black, on the opposite rim. The third shaft
swerved downward and came within the second ring, some two fingers’
breadths away. Nathless, a general cry went up, as this was the best
shooting Clifton had done that day.

Will Scarlet was chosen to follow him, and now took his place and
carefully chose three round and full-feathered arrows.

“Careful, my sweet coz!” quoth Robin in a low tone. “The knave has left
wide space at the center for all of your darts.”

But Robin gave Will the wrong caution, for over-much care spoiled
his aim. His first shaft flew wide and lodged in the second ring even
further away than the worst shot of Clifton.

“Your pardon, coz!” quoth Robin hastily. “Bid care go to the bottom of
the sea, and do you loose your string before it sticks to your fingers!”

And Will profited by this hint, and loosed his next two shafts as
freely as though they flew along a Sherwood glade. Each struck upon the
bull’s-eye, and one even nearer the center than his rival’s mark. Yet
the total score was adjudged in favor of Clifton. At this Will Scarlet
bit his lip, but said no word, while the crowd shouted and waved yellow
flags for very joy that the King’s man had overcome the outlaw. They
knew, also, that this demonstration would please the King.

The target was now cleared for the next two contestants--Geoffrey and
Allan-a-Dale. Whereat, it was noticed that many ladies in the Queen’s
booths boldly flaunted Allan’s colors, much to the honest pride which
glowed in the cheeks of one who sat in their midst.

“In good truth,” said more than one lady to Mistress Dale, “if thy
husband can handle the longbow as skilfully as the harp, his rival has
little show of winning!”

The saying augured well. Geoffrey had shot many good shafts that day;
and indeed had risen from the ranks by virtue of them. But now each of
his three shots, though well placed in triangular fashion around the rim
of the bull’s-eye, yet allowed an easy space for Allan to graze within.
His shooting, moreover, was so prettily done, that he was right heartily
applauded--the ladies and their gallants leading in the hand-clapping.

Now you must know that there had long been a friendly rivalry in Robin
Hood’s band as to who was the best shot, next after Robin himself. He
and Will Stutely had lately decided their marksmanship, and Will had
found that Robin’s skill was now so great as to place the leader at the
head of all good bowmen in the forest. But the second place lay between
Little John and Stutely, and neither wished to yield to the other. So
to-day they looked narrowly at their leader to see who should shoot
third. Robin read their faces at a glance, and laughing merrily, broke
off two straws and held them out.

“The long straw goes next!” he decided; and it fell to Stutely.

Elwyn the Welshman was to precede him; and his score was no whit better
than Geoffrey’s. But Stutely failed to profit by it. His besetting sin
at archery had ever been an undue haste and carelessness. To-day these
were increased by a certain moodiness, that Little John had outranked
him. So his first two shafts flew swiftly, one after the other, to
lodging places outside the Welshman’s mark.

“Man! man!” cried Robin entreatingly, “you do forget the honor of the
Queen, and the credit of Sherwood!”

“I ask your pardon, master!” quoth Will humbly enough, and loosing as he
spoke his last shaft. It whistled down the course unerringly and struck
in the exact center--the best shot yet made.

Now some shouted for Stutely and some shouted for Elwyn; but Elwyn’s
total mark was declared the better. Whereupon the King turned to the
Queen. “What say you now?” quoth he in some triumph. “Two out of the
three first rounds have gone to my men. Your outlaws will have to shoot
better than that in order to save your wager!”

The Queen smiled gently.

“Yea, my lord,” she said. “But the twain who are left are able to do the
shooting. You forget that I still have Little John and Robin Hood.”

“And you forget, my lady, that I still have Tepus and Gilbert.”

So each turned again to the lists and awaited the next rounds in silent
eagerness. I ween that King Harry had never watched the invasion of an
enemy with more anxiety than he now felt.

Tepus was chosen to go next and he fell into the same error with Will
Scarlet. He held the string a moment too long, and both his first and
second arrows came to grief. One of them, however, came within the black
rim, and he followed it up by placing his third in the full center,
just as Stutely had done in his last. These two centers were the fairest
shots that had been made that day; and loud was the applause which
greeted this second one. But the shouting was as nothing to the uproar
which followed Little John’s shooting. That good-natured giant seemed
determined to outdo Tepus by a tiny margin in each separate shot; for
the first and the second shafts grazed his rival’s on the inner side,
while for the third Little John did the old trick of the forest: he
shot his own arrow in a graceful curve which descended from above upon
Tepus’s final center shaft with a glancing blow that drove the other out
and left the outlaw’s in its place.

The King could scarce believe his eyes. “By my halidom!” quoth he, “that
fellow deserves either a dukedom or a hanging! He must be in league with
Satan himself! Never saw I such shooting.”

“The score is tied, my lord,” said the Queen; “we have still to see
Gilbert and Robin Hood.”

Gilbert now took his stand and slowly shot his arrows, one after
another, into the bull’s-eye. ‘Twas the best shooting he had yet
done, but there was still the smallest of spaces left--if you looked
closely--at the very center.

“Well done, Gilbert!” spoke up Robin Hood. “You are a foeman worthy of
being shot against.” He took his own place as he spoke. “Now if you had
placed one of your shafts _there_”--loosing one of his own--“and another
_there_”--out sped the second--“and another _there_”--the third was
launched--“mayhap the King would have declared you the best bowman in
all England!”

But the last part of his merry speech was drowned in the wild tumult
of applause which followed his exploit. His first two shafts had packed
themselves into the small space left at the bull’s-eye; while his third
had split down between them, taking half of each, and making all three
appear from a distance, as one immense arrow.

Up rose the King in amazement and anger.

“Gilbert is not yet beaten!” he cried. “Did he not shoot within the mark
thrice? And that is allowed a best in all the rules of archery.”

Robin bowed low.

“As it please Your Majesty!” quoth he. “But may I be allowed to place
the mark for the second shooting?”

The King waved his hand sullenly.. Thereupon Robin prepared another old
trick of the greenwood, and got him a light, peeled willow wand which he
set in the ground in place of the target.

“There, friend Gilbert,” called he gaily; “belike you can hit that!”

“I can scarce see it from here,” said Gilbert, “much less hit it.
Nathless, for the King’s honor, I will try.”

But this final shot proved his undoing, and his shaft flew harmlessly
by the thin white streak. Then came Robin to his stand again, and picked
his arrow with exceeding care, and tried his string. Amid a breathless
pause he drew the good yew bow back to his ear, glanced along the shaft,
and let the feathered missile fly. Straight it sped, singing a keen note
of triumph as it went. The willow wand was split in twain, as though it
had met a hunter’s knife.

“Verily, I think your bow is armed with witchcraft!” cried Gilbert. “For
I did not believe such shooting possible.”

“You should come to see our merry lads in the greenwood,” retorted Robin
lightly. “For willow wands do not grow upon the cobblestones of London
town.”

Meanwhile the King in great wrath had risen to depart, first signing the
judges to distribute the prizes. Never a word said he, of good or
ill, to the Queen, but mounted his horse and, followed by his sons and
knights, rode off the field. The archers dropped upon one knee as he
passed, but he gave them a single baleful look and was gone.

Then the Queen beckoned the outlaws to approach, and they did so and
knelt at her feet.

“Right well have ye served me,” she said, “and sorry am I that the
King’s anger is aroused thereby. But fear ye not. His word and grace
hold true. As to these prizes ye have gained, I add others of mine
own--the wagers I have won from His Majesty the King and from the lord
Bishop of Hereford. Buy with some of these moneys the best swords ye
can find in London, for all your band, and call them the swords of the
Queen. And swear with them to protect all the poor and the helpless and
the women--kind who come your way.”

“We swear,” said the five yeomen solemnly.

Then the Queen gave each of them her hand to kiss, and arose and
departed with all her ladies. And after they were gone, the King’s
archers came crowding around Robin and his men, eager to get a glimpse
of the fellows about whom they had heard so much. And back of them came
a great crowd of the spectators pushing and jostling in their efforts to
come nearer.

“Verily!” laughed Little John, “they must take us for a Merry Andrew
show!”

Now the judges came up, and announced each man his prize, according
to the King’s command. To Robin was give the purse containing twoscore
golden pounds; to Little John the twoscore silver pennies; and to
Allan-a-Dale the fine inlaid bugle, much to his delight, for he was
skilled at blowing sweet tunes upon the horn hardly less than handling
the harp strings. But when the Rhenish wine and English beer and harts
of Dallom Lea were spoken of, Robin said:

“Nay, what need we of wine or beer, so far from the greenwood? And
‘twould be like carrying coals to Newcastle, to drive those harts to
Sherwood! Now Gilbert and Tepus and their men have shot passing well.
Wherefore, the meat and drink must go to them, an they will accept it of
us.”

“Right gladly,” replied Gilbert grasping his hand. “Ye are good men
all, and we will toast you every one, in memory of the greatest day at
archery that England has ever seen, or ever will see!”

Thus said all the King’s archers, and the hand of good-fellowship was
given amid much shouting and clapping on the shoulder-blades.

And so ended King Harry’s tourney, whose story has been handed down from
sire to son, even unto the present day.




CHAPTER XIV

HOW ROBIN HOOD WAS SOUGHT OF THE TINKER

     And while the tinker fell asleep,
     Robin made haste away,
     And left the tinker in the lurch,
     For the great shot to pay.

King Henry was as good as his word. Robin Hood and his party were
suffered to depart from London--the parting bringing keen sorrow to
Marian--and for forty days no hand was raised against them. But at
the end of that time, the royal word was sent to the worthy Sheriff at
Nottingham that he must lay hold upon the outlaws without further delay,
as he valued his office.

Indeed, the exploits of Robin and his band, ending with the great
tourney in Finsbury Field, had made a mighty stir through all England,
and many there were to laugh boldly at the Nottingham official for his
failures to capture the outlaws.

The Sheriff thereupon planned three new expeditions into the greenwood,
and was even brave enough to lead them, since he had fifteen-score men
at his beck and call each time. But never the shadow of an outlaw did
he see, for Robin’s men lay close, and the Sheriff’s men knew not how to
come at their chief hiding-place in the cove before the cavern.

Now the Sheriff’s daughter had hated Robin Hood bitterly in her heart
ever since the day he refused to bestow upon her the golden arrow, and
shamed her before all the company. His tricks, also, upon her father
were not calculated to lessen her hatred, and so she sought about for
means to aid the Sheriff in catching the enemy.

“There is no need to go against this man with force of arms,” she said.
“We must meet his tricks with other tricks of our own.”

“Would that we could!” groaned the Sheriff. “The fellow is becoming a
nightmare unto me.”

“Let me plan a while,” she replied. “Belike I can cook up some scheme
for his undoing.”

“Agreed,” said the Sheriff, “and if anything comes of your planning,
I will e’en give you an hundred silver pennies for a new gown, and a
double reward to the man who catches the outlaws.”

Now upon that same day, while the Sheriff’s daughter was racking her
brains for a scheme, there came to the Mansion House a strolling tinker
named Middle, a great gossip and braggart. And as he pounded away upon
some pots and pans in the scullery, he talked loudly about what _he_
would do, if he once came within reach of that rascal Robin Hood.

“It might be that this simple fellow could do something through his
very simplicity,” mused the Sheriff’s daughter, overhearing his prattle.
“Odds bodikins! ‘twill do no harm to try his service, while I bethink
myself of some better plan.”

And she called him to her, and looked him over--a big brawny fellow
enough, with an honest look about the eye, and a countenance so open
that when he smiled his mouth seemed the only country on the map.

“I am minded to try your skill at outlaw catching,” she said, “and will
add goodly measure to the stated reward if you succeed. Do you wish to
make good your boasted prowess?”

The tinker grinned broadly.

“Yes, your ladyship,” he said.

“Then here is a warrant made out this morning by the Sheriff himself.
See that you keep it safely and use it to good advantage.”

And she dismissed him.

Middle departed from the house mightily pleased with himself, and
proud of his commission. He swung his crab-tree-staff recklessly in his
glee--so recklessly that he imperiled the shins of more than one angry
passer-by--and vowed he’d crack the ribs of Robin Hood with it, though
he was surrounded by every outlaw in the whole greenwood.

Spurred on by the thoughts of his own coming bravery, he left the town
and proceeded toward Barnesdale. The day was hot and dusty, and at
noontime he paused at a wayside inn to refresh himself. He began by
eating and drinking and dozing, in turn, then sought to do all at once.

Mine host of the “Seven Does” stood by, discussing the eternal Robin
with a drover.

“Folk do say that my lord Sheriff has sent into Lincoln for more
men-at-arms and horses, and that when he has these behind him, he’ll
soon rid the forest of these fellows.”

“Of whom speak you?” asked the tinker sitting up.

“Of Robin Hood and his men,” said the host; “but go to sleep again. You
will never get the reward!”

“And why not?” asked the tinker, rising with great show of dignity.

“Where our Sheriff has failed, and the stout Guy of Gisborne, and many
more beside, it behoves not a mere tinker to succeed.”

The tinker laid a heavy hand upon the innkeeper’s fat shoulder, and
tried to look impressive.

“There is your reckoning, host, upon the table. I must e’en go upon my
way, because I have more important business than to stand here gossiping
with you. But be not surprised, if, the next time you see me, I shall
have with me no less person than Robin Hood himself!”

And he strode loftily out the door and walked up the hot white road
toward Barnesdale.

He had not gone above a quarter of a mile when he met a young man with
curling brown hair and merry eyes. The young man carried his light cloak
over his arm, because of the heat, and was unarmed save for a light
sword at his side. The newcomer eyed the perspiring tinker in a friendly
way, and seeing he was a stout fellow accosted him.

“Good-day to you!” said he.

“Good-day to you!” said the tinker; “and a morrow less heating.”

“Aye,” laughed the other. “Whence come you? And know you the news?”

“What is the news?” said the gossipy tinker, pricking up his ear; “I am
a tinker by trade, Middle by name, and come from over against Banbury.”

“Why as for the news,” laughed the stranger, “I hear that two tinkers
were set i’ the stocks for drinking too much ale and beer.”

“If that be all your news,” retorted Middle, “I can beat you clear to
the end of the lane.”

“What news have you? Seeing that you go from town to town, I ween you
can outdo a poor country yokel at tidings.”

“All I have to tell,” said the other, “is that I am especially
commissioned”--he felt mightily proud of these big words--“especially
commissioned to seek a bold outlaw which they call Robin Hood.”

“So?” said the other arching his brows. “How ‘especially commissioned’?”

“I have a warrant from the Sheriff, sealed with the King’s own seal, to
take him where I can; and if you can tell me where he is, I will e’en
make a man of you.”

“Let me see the warrant,” said the other, “to satisfy myself if it be
right; and I will do the best I can to bring him to you.”

“That will I not,” replied the tinker; “I will trust none with it.
And if you’ll not help me to come at him I must forsooth catch him by
myself.”

And he made his crab-tree-staff whistle shrill circles in the air.

The other smiled at the tinker’s simplicity, and said:

“The middle of the road on a hot July day is not a good place to talk
things over. Now if you’re the man for me and I’m the man for you, let’s
go back to the inn, just beyond the bend of road, and quench our thirst
and cool our heads for thinking.”

“Marry come up!” quoth the tinker. “That will I! For though I’ve just
come from there, my thirst rises mightily at the sound of your voice.”

So back he turned with the stranger and proceeded to the “Seven Does.”

The landlord arched his eyebrows silently when he saw the two come in,
but served them willingly.

The tinker asked for wine, and Robin for ale. The wine was not the most
cooling drink in the cellar, nor the clearest headed. Nathless, the
tinker asked for it, since it was expensive and the other man had
invited him to drink. They lingered long over their cups, Master Middle
emptying one after another while the stranger expounded at great length
on the best plans for coming at and capturing Robin Hood.

In the end the tinker fell sound asleep while in the act of trying to
get a tankard to his lips. Then the stranger deftly opened the snoring
man’s pouch, took out the warrant, read it, and put it in his own
wallet. Calling mine host to him, he winked at him with a half smile and
told him that the tinker would pay the whole score when he awoke. Thus
was Master Middle left in the lurch “for the great shot to pay.”

Nathless, the stranger seemed in no great hurry. He had the whim to stay
awhile and see what the droll tinker might do when he awoke. So he hid
behind a window shutter, on the outside, and awaited events.

Presently the tinker came to himself with a prodigious yawn, and reached
at once for another drink.

“What were you saying, friend, about the best plan (ya-a-a-ah!) for
catching this fellow?--Hello!--where’s the man gone?”

He had looked around and saw no one with him at the table.

“Host! host!” he shouted, “where is that fellow who was to pay my
reckoning?”

“I know not,” answered the landlord sharply. “Mayhap he left the money
in your purse.”

“No he didn’t!” roared Middle, looking therein. “Help! Help! I’ve been
robbed! Look you, host, you are liable to arrest for high treason! I am
here upon the King’s business, as I told you earlier in the day. And yet
while I did rest under your roof, thinking you were an honest man (hic!)
and one loving of the King, my pouch has been opened and many matters of
state taken from it.”

“Cease your bellowing!” said the landlord. “What did you lose?”

“Oh, many weighty matters, I do assure you. I had with me, item, a
warrant, granted under the hand of my lord High Sheriff of Nottingham,
and sealed with the Kings’s own seal, for the capture (hic!)--and
arrest--and overcoming of a notorious rascal, one Robin Hood of
Barnesdale. Item, one crust of bread. Item, one lump (hic!) of solder.
Item, three pieces of twine. Item, six single keys (hic!), useful
withal. Item, twelve silver pennies, the which I earned this week (hic!)
in fair labor. Item--”

“Have done with your items!” said the host. “And I marvel greatly to
hear you speak in such fashion of your friend, Robin Hood of Barnesdale.
For was he not with you in all good-fellowship?”

“Wh-a-at? _That_ Robin Hood?” gasped Middle with staring eyes. “Why did
you not tell me?”

“Faith, _I_ saw no need o’ telling you! Did you not tell me the first
time you were here to-day, that I need not be surprised if you came back
with no less person than Robin Hood himself?”

“Jesu give me pardon!” moaned the tinker. “I see it all now. He got me
to drinking, and then took my warrant, and my pennies, and my crust--”

“Yes, yes,” interrupted the host. “I know all about that. But pay me the
score for both of you.”

“But I have no money, gossip. Let me go after that vile bag-o’-bones,
and I’ll soon get it out of him.”

“Not so,” replied the other. “If I waited for you to collect from Robin
Hood, I would soon close up shop.”

“What is the account?” asked Middle.

“Ten shillings, just.”

“Then take here my working-bag and my good hammer too; and if I light
upon that knave I will soon come back after them.”

“Give me your leathern coat as well,” said mine host; “the hammer and
bag of tools are as naught to me.”

“Gramercy!” cried Master Middle, losing what was left of his temper.
“It seems that I have escaped one thief only to fall into the hands of
another. If you will but walk with me out into the middle of the road,
I’ll give you such a crack as shall drive some honesty into your thick
skull.”

“You are wasting your breath and my time,” retorted the landlord.

“Give me your things, and get you gone after your man, speedily.”

Middle thought this to be good advice; so he strode forth from the
“Seven Does” in a black mood.

Ere he had gone half a mile, he saw Robin Hood walking demurely among
the trees a little in front of him.

“Ho there, you villain!” roared the tinker. “Stay your steps! I am
desperately in need of you this day!”

Robin turned about with a surprised face.

“What knave is this?” he asked gently, “who comes shouting after me?”

“No knave! no knave at all!” panted the other, rushing up. “But an
honest--man--who would have--that warrant--and the money for drink!”

“Why, as I live, it is our honest tinker who was seeking Robin Hood! Did
you find him, gossip?”

“Marry, that did I! and I’m now going to pay him my respects!”

And he plunged at him, making a sweeping stroke with his
crab-tree-cudgel.

Robin tried to draw his sword, but could not do it for a moment through
dodging the other’s furious blows. When he did get it in hand, the
tinker had reached him thrice with resounding thwacks. Then the tables
were turned, for he dashed in right manfully with his shining blade and
made the tinker give back again.

The greenwood rang with the noise of the fray. ‘Twas steel against
wood, and they made a terrible clattering when they came together. Robin
thought at first that he could hack the cudgel to pieces, for his blade
was one of Toledo--finely tempered steel which the Queen had given him.
But the crab-tree-staff had been fired and hardened and seasoned by the
tinker’s arts until it was like a bar of iron--no pleasant neighbor for
one’s ribs.

Robin presently found this out to his sorrow. The long reach and long
stick got to him when ‘twas impossible for him to touch his antagonist.
So his sides began to ache sorely.

“Hold your hand, tinker,” he said at length. “I cry a boon of you.”

“Before I do it,” said the tinker, “I’d hang you on this tree.”

But even as he spoke, Robin found the moment’s grace for which he
longed; and immediately grasped his horn and blew the three well-known
blasts of the greenwood.

“A murrain seize you!” roared the tinker commencing afresh. “Up to your
old tricks again, are you? Well, I’ll have time to finish my job, if I
hurry.”

But Robin was quite able to hold his own at a pinch, and they had not
exchanged many lunges and passes when up came Little John and Will
Scarlet and a score of yeomen at their heels. Middle was seized without
ceremony, while Robin sat himself down to breathe. “What is the matter?”
 quoth Little John, “that you should sit so weariedly upon the highway
side?”

“Faith, that rascally tinker yonder has paid his score well upon my
hide,” answered Robin ruefully.

“That tinker, then,” said Little John, “must be itching for more work.
Fain would I try if he can do as much for me.”

“Or me,” said Will Scarlet, who like Little John was always willing to
swing a cudgel.

“Nay,” laughed Robin. “Belike I could have done better, an he had given
me time to pull a young tree up by the roots. But I hated to spoil
the Queen’s blade upon his tough stick or no less tough hide. He had a
warrant for my arrest which I stole from him.”

“Also, item, twelve silver pennies,” interposed the tinker, unsubdued;
“item, one crust of bread, ‘gainst my supper. Item, one lump of solder.
Item, three pieces of twine. Item, six single keys. Item--”

“Yes, I know,” quoth the merry Robin; “I stood outside the landlord’s
window and heard you count over your losses. Here they are again; and
the silver pennies are turned by magic into gold. Here also, if you
will, is my hand.”

“I take it heartily, with the pence!” cried Middle. “By my leathern coat
and tools, which I shall presently have out of that sly host, I swear
that I never yet met a man I liked as well as you! An you and your
men here will take me, I swear I’ll serve you honestly. Do you want
a tinker? Nay, but verily you must! Who else can mend and grind your
swords and patch your pannikins--and fight, too, when occasion serve?
Mend your pots! mend your pa-a-ans!”

And he ended his speech with the sonorous cry of his craft.

By this time the whole band was laughing uproariously at the tinker’s
talk.

“What say you, fellows?” asked Robin. “Would not this tinker be a good
recruit?”

“That he would!” answered Will Scarlet, clapping the new man on the
back. “He will keep Friar Tuck and Much the miller’s son from having the
blues.”

So amid great merriment and right good fellowship the outlaws shook
Middle by the hand, and he took oath of fealty, and thought no more of
the Sheriff’s daughter.




CHAPTER XV

HOW ROBIN HOOD WAS TANNED OF THE TANNER

     In Nottingham there lived a jolly tanner,
     With a hey down, down, a down down!
     His name was Arthur-a-Bland,
     There was ne’er a squire in Nottinghamshire

     Dare bid bold Arthur stand.
     And as he went forth, in a summer’s morning,
     With a hey down, down, a down down!
     To the forest of merrie Sherwood,
     To view the red deer, that range here and there,
     There met he with bold Robin Hood.

The Sheriff’s daughter bided for several days in the faint hope that she
might hear tidings of the prattling tinker. But never a word heard she,
and she was forced to the conclusion that her messenger had not so much
as laid eyes upon the outlaw. Little recked she that he was, even then,
grinding sword-points and sharpening arrows out in the good greenwood,
while whistling blithely or chatting merrily with the good Friar Tuck.

Then she bethought herself of another good man, one Arthur-a-Bland, a
tanner who dwelt in Nottingham town and was far-famed in the tourneys
round about. He had done some pretty tricks at archery, but was
strongest at wrestling and the quarter-staff. For three years he had
cast all comers to the earth in wrestling until the famous Eric
o’ Lincoln broke a rib for him in a mighty tussle. Howsoever, at
quarter-staff he had never yet met his match; so that there was never a
squire in Nottinghamshire dare bid bold Arthur stand.

     With a long pike-staff on his shoulder,
     So well he could clear his way
     That by two and three he made men flee
     And none of them could stay.

Thus at least runs the old song which tells of his might.

“This is just the man for me!” thought the Sheriff’s daughter to
herself; and she forthwith summoned him to the Mansion House and
commissioned him to seek out Robin Hood.

The warrant was quite to Arthur’s liking, for he was happiest when out
in the forest taking a sly peep at the King’s deer; and now he reckoned
that he could look at them boldly, instead of by the rays of the moon.
He could say to any King’s Forester who made bold to stop him: “I am
here on the King’s business!”

“Gramercy! No more oak-bark and ditch-water and the smell of half-tanned
hides to-day!” quoth he, gaily. “I shall e’en see what the free air of
heaven tastes like, when it sweeps through the open wood.”

So the tanner departed joyfully upon his errand, but much more
interested in the dun deer of the forest than in any two-legged rovers
therein. This interest had, in fact, caused the Foresters to keep a
shrewd eye upon him in the past, for his tannery was apt to have plenty
of meat in it that was more like venison than the law allowed. As for
the outlaws, Arthur bore them no ill-will; indeed he had felt a secret
envy in his heart at their free life; but he was not afraid to meet any
two men who might come against him. Nathless, the Sheriff’s daughter did
not choose a very good messenger, as you shall presently see.

Away sped the tanner, a piece of bread and some wine in his wallet,
a good longbow and arrows slung across his shoulder, his stout
quarter-staff in his hand, and on his head a cap of trebled raw-hide so
tough that it would turn the edge of a broadsword. He lost no time in
getting out of the hot sun and into the welcome shade of the forest,
where he stalked cautiously about seeking some sign of the dun deer.

Now it so chanced that upon that very morning Robin Hood had sent Little
John to a neighboring village to buy some cloth of Lincoln green for new
suits for all the band. Some of the money recently won of the King
was being spent in this fashion, ‘gainst the approach of winter. Will
Scarlet had been sent on a similar errand to Barnesdale some time
before, if you remember, only to be chased up the hill without his
purchase. So to-day Little John was chosen, and for sweet company’s
sake Robin went with him a part of the way until they came to the “Seven
Does,” the inn where Robin had recently played his prank upon Middle the
tinker. Here they drank a glass of ale to refresh themselves withal,
and for good luck; and Robin tarried a bit while Little John went on his
errand.

Presently Robin entered the edge of the wood, when whom should he see
but Arthur-a-Bland, busily creeping after a graceful deer that browsed
alone down the glade. “Now by Saint George and the Dragon!” quoth Robin
to himself. “I much fear that yon same fellow is a rascally poacher come
after our own and the King’s meat!”

For you must know, by a curious process of reasoning, Robin and his men
had hunted in the royal preserves so long that they had come to consider
themselves joint owners to every animal which roamed therein.

“Nay!” he added, “this must be looked into! That cow-skin cap in sooth
must hide a scurvy varlet!”

And forthwith he crept behind a tree, and thence to another, stalking
our friend Arthur as busily as Arthur was stalking the deer.

This went on for quite a space, until the tanner began to come upon the
deer and to draw his bow in order to tickle the victim’s ribs with a
cloth-yard shaft. But just at this moment Robin unluckily trod upon a
twig which snapped and caused the tanner to turn suddenly.

Robin saw that he was discovered, so he determined to put a bold face on
the matter, and went forward with some smart show of authority.

“Hold!” he cried: “stay your hand! Why, who are you, bold fellow, to
range so boldly here? In sooth, to be brief, ye look like a thief that
has come to steal the King’s deer.”

“Marry, it is scant concern of yours, what I look like!” retorted
Arthur-a-Bland. “Who are you, who speak so bravely?”

“You shall soon find out who I am!” quoth Robin, determining to find
some sport in the matter. “I am a keeper of this forest. The King knows
that I am looking after his deer for him; and therefore we must stay
you.”

“Have you any assistants, friend?” asked the tanner calmly. “For it is
not one man alone who can stop me.”

“Nay truly, gossip,” replied Robin. “I have a good yew bow, also a right
sharp blade at my side. Nathless I need no better assistant than a good
oak-graff like unto yours. Give me a baker’s dozen of minutes with
it and it shall pleasure me to crack that pate of yours for your
sauciness!”

“Softly, my man! Fair and softly! Big words never killed so much as a
mouse--least of all yon deer which has got away while you were filling
all the woods with your noisy breath. So choose your own playthings. For
your sword and your bow I care not a straw; nor for all your arrows to
boot. If I get but a knock at you, ‘twill be as much as you’ll need.”

“Now by our Lady! Will you listen to the braggart?” cried Robin in a
fine rage. “Marry, but I’ll teach ye to be more mannerly!”

So saying he unbuckled his belt; and, flinging his bow upon the ground
he seized hold of a young sapling that was growing near by. His hunting
knife soon had it severed and lopped into shape.

“Now come, fellow!” said Arthur-a-Bland, seeing that he was ready. “And
if I do not tan your hide for you in better shape than ever calf-skin
was turned into top-boots, may a murrain seize me!”

“Stay,” said Robin, “methinks my cudgel is half a foot longer than
yours. I would have them of even length before you begin your tanning.”

“I pass not for length,” bold Arthur replied; “my staff is long enough,
as you will shortly find out. Eight foot and a half, and ‘twill knock
down a calf”--here he made it whistle in the air--“and I hope it will
knock down you.”

Forthwith the two men spat on their hands, laid firm hold upon their
cudgels and began slowly circling round each other, looking for an
opening.

Now it so chanced that Little John had fared expeditiously with his
errand. He had met the merchant, from whom he was wont to buy Lincoln
green, coming along the road; and had made known his wants in few words.
The merchant readily undertook to deliver the suits by a certain day
in the following month. So Little John, glad to get back to the cool
shelter of the greenwood, hasted along the road lately taken by Robin.

Presently he heard the sound of angry voices, one of which he recognized
as his captain’s.

“Now, Heaven forfend,” quoth he, “that Robin Hood has fallen into the
clutches of a King’s man! I must take a peep at this fray.”

So he cautiously made his way from tree to tree, as Robin had done, till
he came to the little open space where Robin and Arthur were circling
about each other with angry looks, like two dogs at bay.

“Ha! this looks interesting!” muttered Little John to himself, for he
loved a good quarter-staff bout above anything else in the world, and
was the best man at it in all the greenwood. And he crawled quietly
underneath a friendly bush--much as he had done when Robin undertook to
teach Will Scarlet a lesson--and chuckled softly to himself and slapped
his thigh and prepared to watch the fight at his ease.

Indeed it was both exciting and laughable. You would have chuckled one
moment and caught your breath the next, to see those two stout fellows
swinging their sticks--each half as long again as the men were, and
thick as their arm--and edging along sidewise, neither wishing to strike
the first blow.

At last Robin could no longer forbear, and his good right arm swung
round like a flash. Ping! went the stick on the back of the other’s
head, raising such a welt that the blood came. But the tanner did not
seem to mind it at all, for bing! went his own staff in return, giving
Robin as good as he had sent. Then the battle was on, and furiously it
waged. Fast fell the blows, but few save the first ones landed, being
met in mid-air by a counter-blow till the thwacking sticks sounded like
the steady roll of a kettle-drum and the oak--bark flew as fine as it
had ever done in Arthur-a-Bland’s tannery.

Round and round they fought, digging their heels into the ground to keep
from slipping, so that you would have vowed there had been a yoke of
oxen ploughing a potato-patch. Round and round, up and down, in and
out, their arms working like threshing-machines, went the yeoman and the
tanner, for a full hour, each becoming more astonished every minute that
the other was such a good fellow. While Little John from underneath his
bushy covert had much ado to keep from roaring aloud in pure joy.

Finally Robin saw his chance and brought a full arm blow straight down
upon the other’s head with a force that would have felled a bullock.
But Arthur’s trebled cow-skin cap here stood him in good stead: the blow
glanced off without doing more than stunning him. Nathless, he reeled
and had much ado to keep from falling; seeing which Robin stayed
his hand--to his own sorrow, for the tanner recovered his wits in a
marvelous quick space and sent back a sidelong blow which fairly lifted
Robin off his feet and sent him tumbling on to the grass.

“Hold your hand! hold your hand!” roared Robin with what little breath
he had left. “Hold, I say, and I will give you the freedom of the
greenwood.”

“Why, God-a-mercy,” said Arthur; “I may thank my staff for that--not
_you_.”

“Well, well, gossip’ let be as it may. But prithee tell me your name and
trade. I like to know fellows who can hit a blow like that same last.”

“I am a tanner,” replied Arthur-a-Bland. “In Nottingham long have
I wrought. And if you’ll come to me I swear I’ll tan your hides for
naught.”

“Odds bodikins!” quoth Robin ruefully. “Mine own hide is tanned enough
for the present. Howsoever, there be others in this wood I would fain
see you tackle. Harkee, if you will leave your tan-pots and come with
me, as sure as my name is Robin Hood, you shan’t want gold or fee.”

“By the breath o’ my body!” said Arthur, “that will I do!” and he
gripped him gladly by the hand. “But I am minded that I clean forgot the
errand that brought me to Sherwood. I was commissioned by some, under
the Sheriff’s roof, to capture you.”

“So was a certain tinker, now in our service,” said Robin smilingly.

“Verily ‘tis a new way to recruit forces!” said the tanner laughing
loudly. “But tell me, good Robin Hood, where is Little John? I fain
would see him, for he is a kinsman on my mother’s side.”

“Here am I, good Arthur-a-Bland!” said a voice; and Little John
literally rolled out from under the bush to the sward. His eyes were
full of tears from much laughter which had well-nigh left him powerless
to get on his feet.

As soon as the astonished tanner saw who it was, he gave Little John a
mighty hug around the neck, and lifted him up on his feet, and the two
pounded each other on the back soundly, so glad were they to meet again.

“O, man, man!” said Little John as soon as he had got his breath. “Never
saw I so fine a sight in all my born days. You did knock him over like
as he were a ninepin!”

“And you do joy to see me thwacked about on the ribs?” asked Robin with
some choler.

“Nay, not that, master!” said Little John. “But ‘tis the second time I
have had special tickets to a show from beneath the bushes, and I cannot
forbear my delight. Howsoever, take no shame unto yourself, for
this same Arthur-a-Bland is the best man at the quarter-staff in all
Nottinghamshire. It commonly takes two or three men to hold him.”

“Unless it be Eric o’ Lincoln,” said Arthur modestly; “and I well know
how you paid him out at the Fair.”

“Say no more!” said Robin springing to his feet; “for well I know that I
have done good business this day, and a few bruises are easy payment
for the stout cudgel I am getting into the band. Your hand again, good
Arthur-a-Bland! Come! let us after the deer of which I spoiled your
stalking.”

“Righty gladly!” quoth Arthur. “Come, Cousin Little John! Away with
vats and tan-bark and vile-smelling cowhides! I’ll follow you two in the
sweet open air to the very ends of earth!”




CHAPTER XVI

HOW ROBIN HOOD MET SIR RICHARD OF THE LEA

     Then answered him the gentle knight
     With words both fair and thee:
     “God save thee, my good Robin,
     And all thy company!”

Now you must know that some months passed by. The winter dragged its
weary length through Sherwood Forest, and Robin Hood and his merry men
found what cheer they could in the big crackling fires before their
woodland cave. Friar Tuck had built him a little hermitage not far away,
where he lived comfortably with his numerous dogs.

The winter, I say, reached an end at last, and the blessed spring came
and went. Another summer passed on apace, and still neither King nor
Sheriff nor Bishop could catch the outlaws, who, meanwhile, thrived and
prospered mightily in their outlawry. The band had been increased
from time to time by picked men such as Arthur-a-Bland and David of
Doncaster--he who was the jolliest cobbler for miles around--until it
now numbered a full sevenscore of men; seven companies each with its
stout lieutenant serving under Robin Hood. And still they relieved the
purses of the rich, and aided the poor, and feasted upon King’s deer
until the lank Sheriff of Nottingham was well-nigh distracted.

Indeed, that official would probable have lost his office entirely, had
it not been for the fact of the King’s death. Henry passed away, as all
Kings will, in common with ordinary men, and Richard of the Lion Heart
was proclaimed as his successor.

Then Robin and his men, after earnest debate, resolved to throw
themselves upon the mercy of the new King, swear allegiance, and ask to
be organized into Royal Foresters. So Will Scarlet and Will Stutely and
Little John were sent to London with this message, which they were first
to entrust privately to Maid Marian. But they soon returned with bad
tidings. The new King had formerly set forth upon a crusade to the Holy
Land, and Prince John, his brother, was impossible to deal with--being
crafty, cruel and treacherous. He was laying his hands upon all the
property which could easily be seized; among other estates, that of
the Earl of Huntingdon, Robin’s old enemy and Marian’s father, who had
lately died.

Marian herself was in sore straits. Not only had her estates been taken
away, and the maid been deprived of the former protection of the Queen,
but the evil Prince John had persecuted her with his attentions. He
thought that since the maid was defenseless he could carry her away to
one of his castles and none could gainsay him.

No word of this peril reached Robin’s ears, although his men brought
him word of the seizure of the Huntingdon lands. Nathless he was greatly
alarmed for the safety of Maid Marian, and his heart cried out for
her strongly. She had been continually in his thoughts ever since the
memorable shooting at London town.

One morning in early autumn when the leaves were beginning to turn gold
at the edges, the chestnut-pods to swell with promise of fatness, and
the whole wide woodland was redolent with the ripe fragrance of fruit
and flower, Robin was walking along the edge of a small open glade busy
with his thoughts. The peace of the woods was upon him, despite his
broodings of Marian and he paid little heed to a group of does quietly
feeding among the trees at the far edge of the glade.

But presently this sylvan picture was rudely disturbed for him. A stag,
wild and furious, dashed suddenly forth from among the trees, scattering
the does in swift alarm. The vicious beast eyed the green-and-gold tunic
of Robin, and, lowering it head, charged at him impetuously. So sudden
was its attack that Robin had no time to bend his bow. He sprang behind
a tree while he seized his weapon.

A moment later the wild stag crashed blindly into the tree-trunk with a
shock which sent the beast reeling backward, while the dislodged leaves
from the shivering tree fell in a small shower over Robin’s head.

“By my halidom, I am glad it was not me you struck, my gentle friend!”
 quoth Robin, fixing an arrow upon the string. “Sorry indeed would be any
one’s plight who should encounter you in this black humor.”

Scarcely had he spoken when he saw the stag veer about and fix its
glances rigidly on the bushes to the left side of the glade. These were
parted by a delicate hand, and through the opening appeared the slight
figure of a page. It was Maid Marian, come back again to the greenwood!

She advanced, unconscious alike of Robin’s horrified gaze and the evil
fury of the stag.

She was directly in line with the animal, so Robin dared not launch an
arrow. Her own bow was slung across her shoulder, and her small sword
would be useless against the beast’s charge. But now as she caught sight
of the stag she pursed her lips as though she would whistle to it.

“For the love of God, dear lady!” cried Robin; and then the words died
in his throat.

With a savage snort of rage, the beast rushed at this new and inviting
target--rushed so swiftly and from so short a distance that she could
not defend herself. She sprang to one side as it charged down upon her,
but a side blow from its antlers stretched her upon the ground. The stag
stopped, turned, and lowered its head preparing to gore her to death.

Already its cruel horns were coming straight for her, while she, white
of face and bewildered by the sudden attack, was struggling to rise
and draw her sword. A moment more and the end would come. But the sharp
voice of Robin and already spoken.

“Down, Marian!” he cried, and the girl instinctively obeyed, just as
the shaft from Robin’s bow went whizzing close above her head and struck
with terrific force full in the center of the stag’s forehead.

The beast stumbled in its charge and fell dead, across the body of the
fainting maid.

Robin was quickly by her side, and dragged the beast from off the girl.

Picking her up in his strong arms, he bore her swiftly to the side of
one of the many brooks which watered the vale.

He dashed cool water upon her face, roughly almost, in his agony of fear
that the she was already dead, and he could have shed tears of joy to
see those poor, closed eyelids tremble. He redoubled his efforts; and
presently she gave a little gasp.

“Where am I? What is’t?”

“You are in Sherwood, dear maid, tho’, i’ faith, we gave you a rude
reception!”

She opened her eyes and sat up. “Methinks you have rescued me from
sudden danger, sir,” she said.

Then she recognized Robin for the first time, and a radiant smile came
over her face, together with the rare blush of returned vitality,
and her head sank upon his shoulder with a little tremble and sigh of
relief.

“Oh, Robin, it is you!” she murmured.

“Aye, ‘tis I. Thank heaven, I was at hand to do you service!” Robin’s
tones were deep and full of feeling. “I swear, dear Marian, that I will
not let you from my care henceforth.”

Not another word was spoken for some moments, while her head still
rested confidingly upon his breast. Then recollecting, he suddenly
cried:

“Gramercy, I make but a poor nurse! I have not even asked if any of your
bones were broken.”

“No, not any,” she answered springing lightly to her feet to show him.

“That foolish dizziness o’ercame me for the nonce, but we can now
proceed on our way.”

“Nay, I meant not that,” he protested; “why should we haste? First tell
me of the news in London town, and of yourself.”

So she told him how that the Prince had seized upon her father’s lands,
and had promised to restore them to her if she would listen to his suit;
and how that she knew he meant her no good, for he was even then suing
for a Princess’s hand.

“That is all, Robin,” she ended simply; “and that is why I donned again
my page’s costume and came to you in the greenwood.”

Robin’s brow had grown fiercely black at the recital of her wrong; and
he had laid stern hand upon the hilt of his sword. “By this sword which
Queen Eleanor gave me!” he said impetuously; “and which was devoted to
the service of all womankind, I take oath that Prince John and all his
armies shall not harm you!”

So that is how Maid Marian came to take up her abode in the greenwood,
where the whole band of yeomen welcomed her gladly and swore fealty; and
where the sweet lady of Allan-a-Dale made her fully at home.

But this was a day of deeds in Sherwood Forest, and we ‘gan to tell you
another happening which led to later events.

While Robin and Marian were having their encounter with the stag, Little
John, Much the miller’s son, and Will Scarlet had sallied forth to watch
the highroad leading to Barnesdale, if perchance they might find some
haughty knight or fat priest whose wallet needed lightening.

They had scarcely watched the great road known as Watling Street which
runs from Dover in Kent to Chester town--for many minutes, when they
espied a knight riding by in a very forlorn and careless manner.

     All dreary was his semblance,
     And little was his pride,
     His one
     foot in the stirrup stood,
     His other waved beside.

     His visor hung down o’er his eyes,
     He rode in single array,
     A sorrier man than he was one
     Rode never in summer’s day.

Little John came up to the knight and bade him stay; for who can
judge of a man’s wealth by his looks? The outlaw bent his knee in all
courtesy, and prayed him to accept the hospitality of the forest.

“My master expects you to dine with him, to-day,” quoth he, “and indeed
has been fasting while awaiting your coming, these three hours.”

“Who is your master?” asked the knight.

“None other than Robin Hood,” replied Little John, laying his hand upon
the knight’s bridle.

Seeing the other two outlaws approaching, the knight shrugged his
shoulders, and replied indifferently.

“‘Tis clear that your invitation is too urgent to admit of refusal,”
 quoth he, “and I go with you right willingly, my friends. My purpose
was to have dined to-day at Blyth or Doncaster; but nothing matters
greatly.”

So in the same lackadaisical fashion which had marked all his actions
that day, the knight suffered his horse to be led to the rendezvous of
the band in the greenwood.

Marian had not yet had time to change her page’s attire, when the three
escorts of the knight hove in sight. She recognized their captive as Sir
Richard of the Lea, whom she had often seen at court; and fearing lest
he might recognize her, she would have fled. But Robin asked her, with a
twinkle, if she would not like to play page that day, and she in roguish
mood consented to do so.

“Welcome, Sir Knight,” said Robin, courteously. “You are come in good
time, for we were just preparing to sit down to meat.”

“God save and thank you, good master Robin,” returned the knight; “and
all your company. It likes me well to break the fast with you.”

So while his horse was cared for, the knight laid aside his own heavy
gear, and laved his face and hands, and sat down with Robin and all his
men to a most plentiful repast of venison, swans, pheasants, various
small birds, cake and ale. And Marian stood behind Robin and filled his
cup and that of the guest.

After eating right heartily of the good cheer, the knight brightened
up greatly and vowed that he had not enjoyed so good a dinner for nigh
three weeks. He also said that if ever Robin and his fellows should come
to his domains, he would strive to set them down to as good a dinner on
his own behalf.

But this was not exactly the sort of payment which Robin had expected to
receive. He thanked the knight, therefore, in set phrase, but reminded
him that a yeoman like himself might hardly offer such a dinner to a
knight as a gift of charity.

“I have no money, Master Robin,” answered the knight frankly. “I have so
little of the world’s goods, in sooth, that I should be ashamed to offer
you the whole of it.”

“Money, however little, always jingles merrily in our pockets,” said
Robin, smiling. “Pray you tell me what you deem a little sum.”

“I have of my own ten silver pennies,” said the knight. “Here they are,
and I wish they were ten times as many.”

He handed Little John his pouch, and Robin nodded carelessly.

“What say you to the total, Little John?” he asked as though in jest.

“‘Tis true enough, as the worthy knight hath said,” responded the big
fellow gravely emptying the contents on his cloak.

Robin signed to Marian, who filled a bumper of wine for himself and his
guest.

“Pledge me, Sir Knight!” cried the merry outlaw; “and pledge me
heartily, for these sorry times. I see that your armor is bent and that
your clothes are torn. Yet methinks I saw you at court, once upon a day,
and in more prosperous guise. Tell me now, were you a yeoman and made a
knight by force? Or, have you been a bad steward to yourself, and wasted
your property in lawsuits and the like? Be not bashful with us. We shall
not betray your secrets.”

“I am a Saxon knight in my own right; and I have always lived a sober
and quiet life,” the sorrowful guest replied. “‘Tis true you have seen
me at court, mayhap, for I was an excited witness of your shooting
before King Harry--God rest his bones! My name is Sir Richard of the
Lea, and I dwell in a castle, not a league from one of the gates of
Nottingham, which has belonged to my father, and his father, and his
father’s father before him. Within two or three years ago my neighbors
might have told you that a matter of four hundred pounds one way or
the other was as naught to me. But now I have only these ten pennies of
silver, and my wife and son.”

“In what manner have you lost your riches?” asked Robin.

“Through folly and kindness,” said the knight, sighing. “I went with
King Richard upon a crusade, from which I am but lately returned, in
time to find my son--a goodly youth--grown up. He was but twenty, yet he
had achieved a squire’s training and could play prettily in jousts and
tournaments and other knightly games. But about this time he had the ill
luck to push his sport too far, and did accidentally kill a knight in
the open lists. To save the boy, I had to sell my lands and mortgage my
ancestral castle; and this not being enough, in the end I have had to
borrow money, at a ruinous interest, from my lord of Hereford.”

“A most worthy Bishop,” said Robin ironically. “What is the sum of your
debt?”

“Four hundred pounds,” said Sir Richard, “and the Bishop swears he will
foreclose the mortgage if they are not paid promptly.”

“Have you any friends who would become surety for you?”

“Not one. If good King Richard were here, the tale might be otherwise.”

“Fill your goblet again, Sir Knight,” said Robin; and he turned to
whisper a word in Marian’s ear. She nodded and drew Little John and Will
Scarlet aside and talked earnestly with them, in a low tone.

“Here is health and prosperity to you, gallant Robin,” said Sir Richard,
tilting his goblet. “I hope I may pay your cheer more worthily, the next
time I ride by.”

Will Scarlet and Little John had meanwhile fallen in with Marian’s idea,
for they consulted the other outlaws, who nodded their heads. Thereupon
Little John and Will Scarlet went into the cave near by and presently
returned bearing a bag of gold. This they counted out before the
astonished knight; and there were four times one hundred gold pieces in
it.

“Take this loan from us, Sir Knight, and pay your debt to the Bishop,”
 then said Robin. “Nay, no thanks; you are but exchanging creditors.
Mayhap we shall not be so hard upon you as the Christian Bishop; yet,
again we may be harder. Who can tell?”

There were actual tears in Sir Richard’s eyes, as he essayed to thank
the foresters. But at this juncture, Much, the miller’s son, came from
the cave dragging a bale of cloth. “The knight should have a suit worthy
of his rank, master--think you not so?”

“Measure him twenty ells of it,” ordered Robin.

“Give him a good horse, also,” whispered Marian. “‘Tis a gift which will
come back four-fold, for this is a worthy man. I know him well.”

So the horse was given, also, and Robin bade Arthur-a-Bland ride with
the knight as far as his castle, as esquire.

The knight was sorrowful no longer; yet he could hardly voice his thanks
through his broken utterance. And having spent the night in rest,
after listening to Allan-a-Dale’s singing, he mounted his new steed the
following morning an altogether different man.

“God save you, comrades, and keep you all!” said he, with deep feeling
in his tones; “and give me a grateful heart!”

“We shall wait for you twelve months from to-day, here in this place,”
 said Robin, shaking him by the hand; “and then you will repay us the
loan, if you have been prospered.”

“I shall return it to you within the year, upon my honor as Sir Richard
of the Lea. And for all time, pray count on me as a steadfast friend.”

So saying the knight and his esquire rode down the forest glade till
they were lost to view.




CHAPTER XVII

HOW THE BISHOP WAS DINED

     “O what is the matter?” then said the Bishop,
     “Or for whom do you make this a-do?
     Or why do you kill the King’s venison,
     When your company is so few?”

     “We are shepherds,” quoth bold Robin Hood,
     “And we keep sheep all the year,
     And we are disposed to be merrie this day,
     And to kill of the King’s fat deer.”

Not many days after Sir Richard of the Lea came to Sherwood Forest,
word reached Robin Hood’s ears that my lord Bishop of Hereford would
be riding that way betimes on that morning. ‘Twas Arthur-a-Bland, the
knight’s quondam esquire, who brought the tidings, and Robin’s face
brightened as he heard it.

“Now, by our Lady!” quoth he, “I have long desired to entertain my lord
in the greenwood, and this is too fair a chance to let slip. Come, my
men, kill me a venison; kill me a good fat deer. The Bishop of Hereford
is to dine with me today, and he shall pay well for his cheer.”

“Shall we dress it here, as usual?” asked Much, the miller’s son.

“Nay, we play a droll game on the churchman. We will dress it by the
highway side, and watch for the Bishop narrowly, lest he should ride
some other way.”

So Robin gave his orders, and the main body of his men dispersed to
different parts of the forest, under Will Stutely and Little John,
to watch other roads; while Robin Hood himself took six of his men,
including Will Scarlet, and Much, and posted himself in full view of the
main road. This little company appeared funny enough, I assure you, for
they had disguised themselves as shepherds. Robin had an old wool cap,
with a tail to it, hanging over his ear, and a shock of hair stood
straight up through a hole in the top. Besides there was so much dirt on
his face that you would never have known him. An old tattered cloak over
his hunter’s garb completed his make-up. The others were no less ragged
and unkempt, even the foppish Will Scarlet being so badly run down at
the heel that the court ladies would hardly have had speech with him.

They quickly provided themselves with a deer and made great preparations
to cook it over a small fire, when a little dust was seen blowing along
the highway, and out of it came the portly Bishop cantering along with
ten men-at-arms at his heels. As soon as he saw the fancied shepherds he
spurred up his horse, and came straight toward them.

“Who are ye, fellows, who make so free with the King’s deer?” he asked
sharply.

“We are shepherds,” answered Robin Hood, pulling at his forelock
awkwardly.

“Heaven have mercy! Ye seem a sorry lot of shepherds. But who gave you
leave to cease eating mutton?”

“‘Tis one of our feast days, lording, and we were disposed to be merry
this day, and make free with a deer, out here where they are so many.”

“By me faith, the King shall hear of this. Who killed yon beast?”

“Give me first your name, excellence, so that I may speak where ‘tis
fitting,” replied Robin stubbornly.

“‘Tis my lord Bishop of Hereford, fellow!” interposed one of the guards
fiercely. “See that you keep a civil tongue in your head.”

“If ‘tis a churchman,” retorted Will Scarlet, “he would do better to
mind his own flocks rather than concern himself with ours.”

“Ye are saucy fellows, in sooth,” cried the Bishop, “and we will see if
your heads will pay for your manners. Come! quit your stolen roast and
march along with me, for you shall be brought before the Sheriff of
Nottingham forthwith.”

“Pardon, excellence!” said Robin, dropping on his knees. “Pardon, I pray
you. It becomes not your lordship’s coat to take so many lives away.”

“Faith, I’ll pardon you!” said the Bishop. “I’ll pardon you, when I see
you hanged! Seize upon them, my men!”

But Robin had already sprung away with his back against a tree. And
from underneath his ragged cloak he drew his trusty horn and winded the
piercing notes which were wont to summon the band.

The Bishop no sooner saw this action than he knew his man, and that
there was a trap set; and being an arrant coward, he wheeled his horse
sharply and would have made off down the road; but his own men, spurred
on the charge, blocked his way. At almost the same instant the bushes
round about seemed literally to become alive with outlaws. Little John’s
men came from one side and Will Stutely’s from the other. In less time
than it takes to tell it, the worthy Bishop found himself a prisoner,
and began to crave mercy from the men he had so lately been ready to
sentence.

     “O pardon, O pardon,” said the Bishop,
     “O pardon, I you pray.
     For if I had known it had been you,
     I’d have gone some other way.”

“I owe you no pardon,” retorted Robin, “but I will e’en treat you better
than you would have treated me. Come, make haste, and go along with me.
I have already planned that you shall dine with me this day.”

So the unwilling prelate was dragged away, cheek by jowl, with the
half-cooked venison upon the back of his own horse; and Robin and his
band took charge of the whole company and led them through the forest
glades till they came to an open space near Barnesdale.

Here they rested, and Robin gave the Bishop a seat full courteously.
Much the miller’s son fell to roasting the deer afresh, while another
and fatter beast was set to frizzle on the other side of the fire.
Presently the appetizing odor of the cooking reached the Bishop’s
nostrils, and he sniffed it eagerly. The morning’s ride had made him
hungry; and he was nothing loath when they bade him come to the dinner.
Robin gave him the best place beside himself, and the Bishop prepared to
fall to.

“Nay, my lord, craving your pardon, but we are accustomed to have grace
before meat,” said Robin decorously. “And as our own chaplain is not
with us to-day, will you be good enough to say it for us?”

The Bishop reddened, but pronounced grace in the Latin tongue hastily,
and then settled himself to make the best of his lot. Red wines and ale
were brought forth and poured out, each man having a horn tankard from
which to drink.

Laughter bubbled among the diners, and the Bishop caught himself smiling
at more than one jest. But who, in sooth, could resist a freshly broiled
venison streak eaten out in the open air to the tune of jest and good
fellowship? Stutely filled the Bishop’s beaker with wine each time he
emptied it, and the Bishop got mellower and mellower as the afternoon
shades lengthened on toward sunset. Then the approaching dusk warned him
of his position.

“I wish, mine host,” quoth he gravely to Robin, who had soberly drunk
but one cup of ale, “that you would now call a reckoning. ‘Tis late, and
I fear the cost of this entertainment may be more than my poor purse can
stand.”

For he bethought himself of his friend, the Sheriff’s former experience.

“Verily, your lordship,” said Robin, scratching his head, “I have
enjoyed your company so much, that I scarce know how to charge for it.”

“Lend me your purse, my lord,” said Little John, interposing, “and
I’ll give you the reckoning by and by.” The Bishop shuddered. He had
collected Sir Richard’s debt only that morning, and was even then
carrying it home.

“I have but a few silver pennies of my own,” he whined; “and as for the
gold in my saddle-bags, ‘tis for the church. Ye surely would not levy
upon the church, good friends.”

But Little John was already gone to the saddle-bags, and returning
he laid the Bishop’s cloak upon the ground, and poured out of the
portmantua a matter of four hundred glittering gold pieces. ‘Twas the
identical money which Robin had lent Sir Richard a short while before!

“Ah!” said Robin, as though an idea had but just then come to him. “The
church is always willing to aid in charity. And seeing this goodly sum
reminds me that I have a friend who is indebted to a churchman for this
exact amount. Now we shall charge you nothing on our own account; but
suffer us to make use of this in aiding my good friend.”

“Nay, nay,” began the Bishop with a wry face, “this is requiting me ill
indeed. Was this not the King’s meat, after all, that we feasted upon?
Furthermore, I am a poor man.”

“Poor forsooth!” answered Robin in scorn. “You are the Bishop of
Hereford, and does not the whole countryside speak of your oppression?
Who does not know of your cruelty to the poor and ignorant--you who
should use your great office to aid them, instead of oppress? Have you
not been guilty of far greater robbery than this, even though less
open? Of myself, and how you have pursued me, I say nothing; nor of
your unjust enmity against my father. But on account of those you have
despoiled and oppressed, I take this money, and will use it far more
worthily than you would. God be my witness in this! There is an end of
the matter, unless you will lead us in a song or dance to show that
your body had a better spirit than your mind. Come, strike up the harp,
Allan!”

“Neither the one nor the other will I do,” snarled the Bishop.

“Faith, then we must help you,” said Little John; and he and
Arthur-a-Bland seized the fat struggling churchman and commenced to hop
up and down. The Bishop being shorter must perforce accompany them in
their gyrations; while the whole company sat and rolled about over the
ground, and roared to see my lord of Hereford’s queer capers. At last he
sank in a heap, fuddled with wine and quite exhausted.

Little John picked him up as though he were a log of wood and carrying
him to his horse, set him astride facing the animal’s tail; and thus
fastened him, leading the animal toward the highroad and, starting the
Bishop, more dead than alive, toward Nottingham.




CHAPTER XVIII

HOW THE BISHOP WENT OUTLAW-HUNTING

     The Bishop he came to the old woman’s house,
     And called with furious mood,
     “Come let me soon see, and bring unto me
     That traitor, Robin Hood.”

The easy success with which they had got the better of the good Bishop
led Robin to be a little careless. He thought that his guest was too
great a coward to venture back into the greenwood for many a long day;
and so after lying quiet for one day, the outlaw ventured boldly upon
the highway, the morning of the second. But he had gone only half a mile
when, turning a sharp bend in the road, he plunged full upon the prelate
himself.

My lord of Hereford had been so deeply smitten in his pride, that he
had lost no time in summoning a considerable body of the Sheriff’s men,
offering to double the reward if Robin Hood could be come upon. This
company was now at his heels, and after the first shock of mutual
surprise, the Bishop gave an exultant shout and spurred upon the outlaw.

It was too late for Robin to retreat by the way he had come, but quick
as a flash he sprang to one side of the road, dodged under some bushes,
and disappeared so suddenly that his pursuers thought he had truly been
swallowed up by magic.

“After him!” yelled the Bishop; “some of you beat up the woods around
him, while the rest of us will keep on the main road and head him off on
the other side!”

For, truth to tell, the Bishop did not care to trust his bones away from
the highroad.

About a mile away, on the other side of this neck of woods, wherein
Robin had been trapped, was a little tumbledown cottage. ‘Twas where
the widow lived, whose three sons had been rescued. Robin remembered the
cottage and saw his one chance to escape.

Doubling in and out among the underbrush and heather with the agility
of a hare, he soon came out of the wood in the rear of the cottage, and
thrust his head through a tiny window.

The widow, who had been at her spinning wheel, rose up with a cry of
alarm.

“Quiet, good mother! ‘Tis I, Robin Hood. Where are your three sons?”

“They should be with you, Robin. Well do you know that. Do they not owe
their lives to you?”

“If that be so, I come to seek payment of the debt,” said Robin in a
breath. “The Bishop is on my heels with many of his men.”

“I’ll cheat the Bishop and all!” cried the woman quickly. “Here, Robin,
change your raiment with me, and we will see if my lord knows an old
woman when he sees her.”

“Good!” said Robin. “Pass your gray cloak out the window, and also your
spindle and twine; and I will give you my green mantle and everything
else down to my bow and arrows.”

While they were talking, Robin had been nimbly changing clothes with the
old woman, through the window, and in a jiffy he stood forth complete,
even to the spindle and twine.

Presently up dashed the Bishop and his men, and, at sight of the
cottage and the old woman, gave pause. The crone was hobbling along with
difficulty, leaning heavily upon a gnarled stick and bearing the spindle
on her other arm. She would have gone by the Bishop’s company, while
muttering to herself, but the Bishop ordered one of his men to question
her. The soldier laid his hand upon her shoulder.

“Mind your business!” croaked the woman, “or I’ll curse ye!”

“Come, come, my good woman,” said the soldier, who really was afraid of
her curses. “I’ll not molest you. But my lord Bishop of Hereford wants
to know if you have seen aught of the outlaw, Robin Hood?”

“And why shouldn’t I see him?” she whined. “Where’s the King or law to
prevent good Robin from coming to see me and bring me food and raiment?
That’s more than my lord Bishop will do, I warrant ye!”

“Peace, woman!” said the Bishop harshly. “We want none of your opinions.
But we’ll take you to Barnesdale and burn you for a witch if you do not
instantly tell us when you last saw Robin Hood.”

“Mercy, good my lord!” chattered the crone, falling on her knees.

“Robin is there in my cottage now, but you’ll never take him alive.”

“We’ll see about that,” cried the Bishop triumphantly. “Enter the
cottage, my men. Fire it, if need be. But I’ll give a purse of gold
pieces, above the reward, to the man who captures the outlaw alive.”

The old woman, being released, went on her way slowly. But it might
have been noticed that the farther she got away from the company and
the nearer to the edge of the woods, the swifter and straighter grew
her pace. Once inside the shelter of the forest she broke into a run of
surprising swiftness.

“Gadzooks!” exclaimed Little John who presently spied her. “Who comes
here? Never saw I witch or woman run so fast. Methinks I’ll send an
arrow close over her head to see which it is.”

“O hold your hand! hold your hand!” panted the supposed woman. “‘Tis I,
Robin Hood. Summon the yeomen and return with me speedily. We have still
another score to settle with my lord of Hereford.”

When Little John could catch his breath from laughing, he winded his
horn.

“Now, mistress Robin,” quoth he, grinning. “Lead on! We’ll be close to
your heels.”

Meanwhile, back at the widow’s cottage the Bishop was growing more
furious every moment. For all his bold words, he dared not fire the
house, and the sturdy door had thus far resisted all his men’s efforts.

“Break it down! Break it down!” he shouted, “and let me soon see who
will fetch out that traitor, Robin Hood!”

At last the door crashed in and the men stood guard on the threshold.
But not one dared enter for fear a sharp arrow should meet him halfway.

“Here he is!” cried one keen-eyed fellow, peering in. “I see him in the
corner by the cupboard. Shall we slay him with our pikes?”

“Nay,” said the Bishop, “take him alive if you can. We’ll make the
biggest public hanging of this that the shire ever beheld.”

But the joy of the Bishop over his capture was short lived. Down the
road came striding the shabby figure of the old woman who had helped him
set the trap; and very wrathy was she when she saw that the cottage door
had been battered in.

“Stand by, you lazy rascals!” she called to the soldiers. “May all the
devils catch ye for hurting an old woman’s hut. Stand by, I say!”

“Hold your tongue!” ordered the Bishop. “These are my men and carrying
out my orders.”

“God-mercy!” swore the beldame harshly. “Things have come to a pretty
pass when our homes may be treated like common gaols. Couldn’t all your
men catch one poor forester without this ado? Come! clear out, you and
your robber, on the instant, or I’ll curse every mother’s son of ye,
eating and drinking and sleeping!”

“Seize on the hag!” shouted the Bishop, as soon as he could get in a
word. “We’ll see about a witch’s cursing. Back to town she shall go,
alongside of Robin Hood.”

“Not so fast, your worship!” she retorted, clapping her hands.

And at the signal a goodly array of greenwood men sprang forth from all
sides of the cottage, with bows drawn back threateningly. The Bishop saw
that his men were trapped again, for they dared not stir. Nathless, he
determined to make a fight for it.

“If one of you but budge an inch toward me, you rascals,” he cried, “it
shall sound the death of your master, Robin Hood! My men have him here
under their pikes, and I shall command them to kill him without mercy.”

“Faith, I should like to see the Robin you have caught,” said a clear
voice from under the widow’s cape; and the outlaw chief stood forth with
bared head, smilingly. “Here am I, my lord, in no wise imperiled by your
men’s fierce pikes. So let us see whom you have been guarding so well.”

The old woman who, in the garb of Robin Hood, had been lying quiet in
the cottage through all the uproar, jumped up nimbly at this. In the
bald absurdity of her disguise she came to the doorway and bowed to the
Bishop.

“Give you good-den, my lord Bishop,” she piped in a shrill voice; “and
what does your Grace at my humble door? Do you come to bless me and give
me alms?”

“Aye, that does he,” answered Robin. “We shall see if his saddle-bags
contain enough to pay you for that battered door.”

“Now by all the saints--” began the Bishop.

“Take care; they are all watching you,” interrupted Robin; “so name them
not upon your unchurchly lips. But I will trouble you to hand over that
purse of gold you had saved to pay for my head.”

“I’ll see you hanged first!” raged the Bishop, stating no more than
what would have been so, if he could do the ordering of things. “Have at
them, my men, and hew them down in their tracks!”

“Hold!” retorted Robin. “See how we have you at our mercy.” And aiming a
sudden shaft he shot so close to the Bishop’s head that it carried away
both his hat and the skull-cap which he always wore, leaving him quite
bald.

The prelate turned as white as his shiny head and clutched wildly at his
ears. He thought himself dead almost.

“Help! Murder!” he gasped. “Do not shoot again! Here’s your purse of
gold!”

And without waiting for further parley he fairly bolted down the road.

His men being left leaderless had nothing for it but to retreat after
him, which they did in sullen order, covered by the bows of the yeomen.
And thus ended the Bishop of Hereford’s great outlaw-hunt in the forest.




CHAPTER XIX

HOW THE SHERIFF HELD ANOTHER SHOOTING MATCH

     “To tell the truth, I’m well informed
     Yon match it is a wile;
     The Sheriff, I know, devises this
     Us archers to beguile.”

Now the Sheriff was so greatly troubled in heart over the growing power
of Robin Hood, that he did a very foolish thing. He went to London town
to lay his troubles before the King and get another force of troops to
cope with the outlaws. King Richard was not yet returned from the Holy
Land, but Prince John heard him with scorn.

“Pooh!” said he, shrugging his shoulders. “What have I to do with all
this? Art thou not sheriff for me? The law is in force to take thy
course of them that injure thee. Go, get thee gone, and by thyself
devise some tricking game to trap these rebels; and never let me see thy
face at court again until thou hast a better tale to tell.”

So away went the Sheriff in sorrier pass than ever, and cudgeled his
brain, on the way home, for some plan of action.

His daughter met him on his return and saw at once that he had been on a
poor mission. She was minded to upbraid him when she learned what he
had told the Prince. But the words of the latter started her to thinking
afresh.

“I have it!” she exclaimed at length. “Why should we not hold another
shooting-match? ‘Tis Fair year, as you know, and another tourney will
be expected. Now we will proclaim a general amnesty, as did King Harry
himself, and say that the field is open and unmolested to all comers.
Belike Robin Hood’s men will be tempted to twang the bow, and then--”

“And then,” said the Sheriff jumping up with alacrity, “we shall see on
which side of the gate they stop over-night!”

So the Sheriff lost no time in proclaiming a tourney, to be held that
same Fall at the Fair. It was open to all comers, said the proclamation,
and none should be molested in their going and coming. Furthermore, an
arrow with a golden head and shaft of silver-white should be given to
the winner, who would be heralded abroad as the finest archer in all the
North Countree. Also, many rich prizes were to be given to other clever
archers.

These tidings came in due course to Robin Hood, under the greenwood
tree, and fired his impetuous spirit.

“Come, prepare ye, my merry men all,” quoth he, “and we’ll go to the
Fair and take some part in this sport.”

With that stepped forth the merry cobbler, David of Doncaster.

“Master,” quoth he, “be ruled by me and stir not from the greenwood. To
tell the truth, I’m well informed yon match is naught but a trap. I know
the Sheriff has devised it to beguile us archers into some treachery.”

“That word savors of the coward,” replied Robin, “and pleases me not.
Let come what will, I’ll try my skill at that same archery.”

Then up spoke Little John and said: “Come, listen to me how it shall be
that we will not be discovered.”

     “Our mantles all of Lincoln-green
     Behind us we will leave;
     We’ll dress us all so several,
     They shall not us perceive.”

     “One shall wear white, another red,
     One yellow, another blue;
     Thus in disguise to the exercise
     We’ll go, whate’er ensue.”

This advice met with general favor from the adventurous fellows, and
they lost no time in putting it into practice. Maid Marian and Mistress
Dale, assisted by Friar Tuck, prepared some vari-colored costumes, and
‘gainst the Fair day had fitted out the sevenscore men till you would
never have taken them for other than villagers decked for the holiday.

And forth went they from the greenwood, with hearts all firm and stout,
resolved to meet the Sheriff’s men and have a merry bout. Along the
highway they fell in with many other bold fellows from the countryside,
going with their ruddy-cheeked lasses toward the wide-open gates of
Nottingham.

So in through the gates trooped the whole gay company, Robin’s men
behaving as awkwardly and laughing and talking as noisily as the rest;
while the Sheriff’s scowling men-at-arms stood round about and sought to
find one who looked like a forester, but without avail.

The herald now set forth the terms of the contest, as on former
occasions, and the shooting presently began. Robin had chosen five of
his men to shoot with him, and the rest were to mingle with the crowd
and also watch the gates. These five were Little John, Will Scarlet,
Will Stutely, Much, and Allan-a-Dale’.

The other competitors made a brave showing on the first round,
especially Gilbert of the White Hand, who was present and never shot
better. The contest later narrowed down between Gilbert and Robin. But
at the first lead, when the butts were struck so truly by various well
known archers, the Sheriff was in doubt whether to feel glad or sorry.
He was glad to see such skill, but sorry that the outlaws were not in
it.

     Some said, “If Robin Hood were here,
     And all his men to boot,
     Sure none of them could pass these men,
     So bravely do they shoot.”

“Aye,” quoth the Sheriff, and scratched his head,

     “I thought he would be here;
     I thought he would, but tho’ he’s bold,
     He durst not now appear.”

This word was privately brought to Robin by David of Doncaster, and the
saying vexed him sorely. But he bit his lip in silence.

“Ere long,” he thought to himself, “we shall see whether Robin Hood be
here or not!”

Meantime the shooting had been going forward, and Robin’s men had done
so well that the air was filled with shouts.

     One cried, “Blue jacket!” another cried, “Brown!”
      And a third cried, “Brave Yellow!”
      But the fourth man said, “Yon man in red
     In this place has no fellow.”

     For that was Robin Hood himself,
     For he was clothed in red,
     At every shot the prize he got,
     For he was both sure and dead.

Thus went the second round of the shooting, and thus the third and last,
till even Gilbert of the White Hand was fairly beaten. During all this
shooting, Robin exchanged no word with his men, each treating the other
as a perfect stranger. Nathless, such great shooting could not pass
without revealing the archers.

The Sheriff thought he discovered, in the winner of the golden arrow,
the person of Robin Hood without peradventure. So he sent word privately
for his men-at-arms to close round the group. But Robin’s men also got
wind of the plan.

To keep up appearances, the Sheriff summoned the crowd to form in a
circle; and after as much delay as possible the arrow was presented. The
delay gave time enough for the soldiers to close in. As Robin received
his prize, bowed awkwardly, and turned away, the Sheriff, letting his
zeal get the better of his discretion, grasped him about the neck and
called upon his men to arrest the traitor.

But the moment the Sheriff touched Robin, he received such a buffet
on the side of his head that he let go instantly and fell back several
paces. Turning to see who had struck him, he recognized Little John.

“Ah, rascal Greenleaf, I have you now!” he exclaimed springing at him.
Just then, however, he met a new check.

“This is from another of your devoted servants!” said a voice which he
knew to be that of Much the miller’s son; and “Thwack!” went his open
palm upon the Sheriff’s cheek sending that worthy rolling over and over
upon the ground.

By this time the conflict had become general, but the Sheriff’s men
suffered the disadvantage of being hampered by the crowd of innocent
on-lookers, whom they could not tell from the outlaws and so dared not
attack; while the other outlaws in the rear fell upon them and put them
in confusion.

For a moment a fierce rain of blows ensued; then the clear bugle-note
from Robin ordered a retreat. The two warders at the nearest gate tried
to close it, but were shot dead in their tracks. David of Doncaster
threw a third soldier into the moat; and out through the gate went
the foresters in good order, keeping a respectful distance between
themselves and the advancing soldiery, by means of their well-directed
shafts.

But the fight was not to go easily this day, for the soldiery, smarting
from their recent discomfiture at the widow’s cottage, and knowing that
the eyes of the whole shire were upon them, fought well, and pressed
closely after the retreating outlaws. More than one ugly wound was
given and received. No less than five of the Sheriff’s men were killed
outright, and a dozen others injured; while four of Robin’s men were
bleeding from severe flesh cuts.

Then Little John, who had fought by the side of his chief, suddenly fell
forward with a slight moan. An arrow had pierced his knee. Robin seized
the big fellow with almost superhuman strength.

     Up he took him on his back,
     And bare him well a mile;
     Many a time he laid him down,
     And shot another while.

Meanwhile Little John grew weaker and closed his eyes; at last he sank
to the ground, and feebly motioned Robin to let him lie. “Master
Robin,” said he, “have I not served you well, ever since we met upon the
bridge?”

“Truer servant never man had,” answered Robin.

“Then if ever you loved me, and for the sake of that service, draw your
bright brown sword and strike off my head; never let me fall alive into
the hand of the Sheriff of Nottingham.”

“Not for all the gold in England would I do either of the things you
suggest.”

“God forbid!” cried Arthur-a-Bland, hurrying to the rescue. And packing
his wounded kinsman upon his own broad shoulders, he soon brought him
within the shelter of the forest.

Once there, the Sheriff’s men did not follow; and Robin caused litters
of boughs to be made for Little John and the other four wounded men.
Quickly were they carried through the wood until the hermitage of Friar
Tuck was reached, where their wounds were dressed. Little John’s hurt
was pronounced to be the most serious of any, but he was assured that
in two or three weeks’ time he could get about again; whereat the active
giant groaned mightily.

That evening consternation came upon the hearts of the band. A careful
roll-call was taken to see it all the yeomen had escaped, when it was
found that Will Stutely was missing, and Maid Marian also was nowhere to
be found. Robin was seized with dread. He knew that Marian had gone to
the Fair, but felt that she would hardly come to grief. Her absence,
however, portended some danger, and he feared that it was connected with
Will Stutely. The Sheriff would hang him speedily and without mercy, if
he were captured.

The rest of the band shared their leader’s uneasiness, though they said
no word. They knew that if Will were captured, the battle must be fought
over again the next day, and Will must be saved at any cost. But no man
flinched from the prospect.

That evening, while the Sheriff and his wife and daughter sat at meat in
the Mansion House, the Sheriff boasted of how he would make an example
of the captured outlaw; for Stutely had indeed fallen into his hands.

“He shall be strung high,” he said, in a loud voice; “and none shall
dare lift a finger. I now have Robin Hood’s men on the run, and we shall
soon see who is master in this shire. I am only sorry that we let them
have the golden arrow.”

As he spoke a missive sped through a window and fell clattering upon his
plate, causing him to spring back in alarm.

It was the golden arrow, and on its feathered shaft was sewed a little
note which read:

“This from one who will take no gifts from liars; and who henceforth
will show no mercy. Look well to yourself. R.H.”




CHAPTER XX

HOW WILL STUTELY WAS RESCUED

     Forth of the greenwood are they gone,
     Yea, all courageously,
     Resolving to bring Stutely home,
     Or every man to die.

The next day dawned bright and sunny. The whole face of nature seemed
gay as if in despite of the tragedy which was soon to take place in the
walls of Nottingham town. The gates were not opened upon this day, for
the Sheriff was determined to carry through the hanging of Will Stutely
undisturbed. No man, therefore, was to be allowed entrance from without,
all that morning and until after the fatal hour of noon, when Will’s
soul was to be launched into eternity.

Early in the day Robin had drawn his men to a point, as near as he
dared, in the wood where he could watch the road leading to the East
gate. He himself was clad in a bright scarlet dress, while his men, a
goodly array, wore their suits of sober Lincoln green. They were armed
with broadswords, and ‘each man carried his bow and a full quiver of new
arrows, straightened and sharpened cunningly by Middle, the tinker. Over
their greenwood dress, each man had thrown a rough mantle, making him
look not unlike a friar.

“I hold it good, comrades,” then said Robin Hood, “to tarry here in
hiding for a season while we sent some one forth to obtain tidings.
For, in sooth, ‘twill work no good to march upon the gates if they be
closed.”

“Look, master,” quoth one of the widow’s sons. “There comes a palmer
along the road from the town. Belike he can tell us how the land ties,
and if Stutely be really in jeopardy. Shall I go out and engage him in
speech?”

“Go,” answered Robin.

So Stout Will went out from the band while the others hid themselves
and waited. When he had come close to the palmer, who seemed a slight,
youngish man, he doffed his hat full courteously and said,

“I crave your pardon, holy man, but can you tell me tidings of
Nottingham town? Do they intend to put an outlaw to death this day?”

“Yea,” answered the palmer sadly. “‘Tis true enough, sorry be the day.
I have passed the very spot where the gallows-tree is going up. ‘Tis out
upon the roadway near the Sheriff’s castle. One, Will Stutely, is to be
hung thereon at noon, and I could not bear the sight, so came away.”

The palmer spoke in a muffled voice; and as his hood was pulled well
over his head, Stout Will could not discern what manner of man he was.
Over his shoulder he carried a long staff, with the fashion of a little
cross at one end; and he had sandaled feet like any monk. Stout Will
notice idly that the feet were very small and white, but gave no second
thought to the matter.

“Who will shrive the poor wretch, if you have come away from him?” he
asked reproachfully.

The question seemed to put a new idea into the palmer’s head. He turned
so quickly that he almost dropped his hood.

“Do you think that I should undertake this holy office?”

“By Saint Peter and the Blessed Virgin, I do indeed! Else, who will
do it? The Bishop and all his whining clerks may be there, but not one
would say a prayer for his soul.”

“But I am only a poor palmer,” the other began hesitatingly.

“Nathless, your prayers are as good as any and better than some,”
 replied Will.

“Right gladly would I go,” then said the palmer; “but I fear me I cannot
get into the city. You may know that the gates are fast locked, for this
morning, to all who would come in, although they let any pass out who
will.”

“Come with me,” said Stout Will, “and my master will see that you pass
through the gates.”

So the palmer pulled his cloak still closer about him and was brought
before Robin Hood, to whom he told all he knew of the situation. He
ended with,

“If I may make so bold, I would not try to enter the city from this
gate, as ‘tis closely guarded since yesterday. But on the far side, no
attack is looked for.”

“My thanks, gentle palmer,” quoth Robin, “your suggestion is good, and
we will deploy to the gate upon the far side.”

So the men marched silently but quickly until they were near to the
western gate. Then Arthur-a-Bland asked leave to go ahead as a scout,
and quietly made his way to a point under the tower by the gate. The
moat was dry on this side, as these were times of peace, and Arthur was
further favored by a stout ivy vine which grew out from an upper window.

Swinging himself up boldly by means of this friendly vine, he crept
through the window and in a moment more had sprung upon the warder from
behind and gripped him hard about the throat. The warder had no chance
to utter the slightest sound, and soon lay bound and gagged upon the
floor; while Arthur-a-Bland slipped himself into his uniform and got
hold of his keys.

‘Twas the work of but a few moments more to open the gates, let down the
bridge, and admit the rest of the band; and they lot inside the town so
quietly that none knew of their coming. Fortune also favored them in the
fact that just at this moment the prison doors had been opened for
the march of the condemned man, and every soldier and idle lout in the
market-lace had trooped thither to see him pass along.

Presently out came Will Stutely with firm step but dejected air. He
looked eagerly to the right hand and to the left, but saw none of the
band. And though more than one curious face betrayed friendship in it,
he knew there could be no aid from such source.

Will’s hands were tied behind his back. He marched between rows of
soldiery, and the Sheriff and the Bishop brought up the rear on horses,
looking mightily puffed up and important over the whole proceeding. He
would show these sturdy rebels--would the Sheriff--whose word was law!
He knew that the gates were tightly fastened; and further he believed
that the outlaws would hardly venture again within the walls, even if
the gates were open. And as he looked around at the fivescore archers
and pikemen who lined the way to the gallows, he smiled with grim
satisfaction.

Seeing that no help was nigh, the prisoner paused at the foot of the
scaffold and spoke in a firm tone to the Sheriff.

“My lord Sheriff,” quoth he, “since I must needs die, grant me one boon;
for my noble master ne’er yet had a man that was hanged on a tree:

     Give me a sword all in my hand,
     And let me be unbound,
     And with thee and thy men will I fight
     Till I lie dead on the ground.”

But the Sheriff would by no means listen to his request; but swore
that he should be hanged a shameful death, and not die by the sword
valiantly.

     “O no, no, no,” the Sheriff said,
     “Thou shalt on the gallows die,
     Aye, and so shall they master too,
     If ever it in me lie.”

     “O dastard coward!” Stutely cried,
     “Faint-hearted peasant slave!
     If ever my master do thee meet,
     Thou shalt thy payment have!”

     “My noble master thee doth scorn,
     And all thy cowardly crew,
     Such silly imps unable are
     Bold Robin to subdue.”

This brave speech was not calculated to soothe the Sheriff. “To the
gallows with him!” he roared, giving a sign to the hangman; and Stutely
was pushed into the rude cart which was to bear him under the gallows
until his neck was leashed. Then the cart would be drawn roughly away
and the unhappy man would swing out over the tail of it into another
world.

But at this moment came a slight interruption. A boyish-looking palmer
stepped forth, and said:

“Your Excellency, let me at least shrive this poor wretch’s soul ere it
be hurled into eternity.”

“No!” shouted the Sheriff, “let him die a dog’s death!”

“Then his damnation will rest upon you,” said the monk firmly. “You, my
lord Bishop, cannot stand by and see this wrong done.”

The Bishop hesitated. Like the Sheriff, he wanted no delay; but
the people were beginning to mutter among themselves and move about
uneasily. He said a few words to the Sheriff, and the latter nodded to
the monk ungraciously.

“Perform your duty, Sir Priest,” quoth he, “and be quick about it!” Then
turning to his soldiers. “Watch this palmer narrowly,” he commanded.
“Belike he is in league with those rascally outlaws.”

But the palmer paid no heed to his last words. He began to tell his
beads quickly, and to speak in a low voice to the condemned man. But he
did not touch his bonds.

Then came another stir in the crowd, and one came pushing through the
press of people and soldiery to come near to the scaffold.

“I pray you, Will, before you die, take leave of all your friends!”
 cried out the well-known voice of Much, the miller’s son.

At the word the palmer stepped back suddenly and looked to one side. The
Sheriff also knew the speaker.

“Seize him!” he shouted. “‘Tis another of the crew. He is the villain
cook who once did rob me of my silver plate. We’ll make a double hanging
of this!”

“Not so fast, good master Sheriff,” retorted Much. “First catch your man
and then hang him. But meanwhile I would like to borrow my friend of you
awhile.”

And with one stroke of his keen hunting-knife he cut the bonds which
fastened the prisoner’s arms, and Stutely leaped lightly from the cart.

“Treason!” screamed the Sheriff, getting black with rage. “Catch the
varlets!”

So saying he spurred his horse fiercely forward, and rising in his
stirrups brought down his sword with might and main at Much’s head. But
his former cook dodged nimbly underneath the horse and came up on the
other side, while the weapon whistled harmlessly in the air.

“Nay, Sir Sheriff!” he cried, “I must e’en borrow your sword for the
friend I have borrowed.”

Thereupon he snatched the weapon deftly from the Sheriff’s hand.

“Here, Stutely!” said he, “the Sheriff has lent you his own sword. Back
to back with me, man, and we’ll teach these knaves a trick or two!”

Meanwhile the soldiers had recovered from their momentary surprise and
had flung themselves into the fray. A clear bugle-note had also sounded
the same which the soldiers had learned to dread. ‘Twas the rallying
note of the green wood men.

Cloth yard shafts began to hurtle through the air, and Robin and his men
cast aside their cloaks and sprang forward crying:

“Lockesley! Lockesley! a rescue! a rescue!”

On the instant, a terrible scene of hand to hand fighting followed. The
Sheriff’s men, though once more taken by surprise, were determined to
sell this rescue dearly. They packed in closely and stubbornly about
the condemned man and Much and the palmer, and it was only by desperate
rushes that the foresters made an opening in the square. Ugly cuts and
bruises were exchanged freely; and lucky was the man who escaped with
only these. Many of the onlookers, who had long hated the Sheriff and
felt sympathy for Robin’s men, also plunged into the conflict--although
they could not well keep out of it, in sooth!--and aided the rescuers no
little.

At last with a mighty onrush, Robin cleaved a way through the press to
the scaffold itself, and not a second too soon; for two men with pikes
had leaped upon the cart, and were in the act of thrusting down upon the
palmer and Will Stutely. A mighty upward blow from Robin’s good blade
sent the pike flying from the hand of one, while a well-directed arrow
from the outskirt pierced the other fellow’s throat.

“God save you, master!” cried Will Stutely joyfully. “I had begun to
fear that I would never see your face again.”

“A rescue!” shouted the outlaws afresh, and the soldiery became
fainthearted and ‘gan to give back. But the field was not yet won, for
they retreated in close order toward the East gate, resolved to hem
the attackers within the city walls. Here again, however, they were in
error, since the outlaws did not go out by their nearest gate. They
made a sally in that direction, in order to mislead the soldiery, then
abruptly turned and headed for the West gate, which was still guarded by
Arthur-a-Bland.

The Sheriff’s men raised an exultant shout at this, thinking they had
the enemy trapped. Down they charged after them, but the outlaws made
good their lead, and soon got through the gate and over the bridge which
had been let down by Arthur-a-Bland.

Close upon their heels came the soldiers--so close, that Arthur had no
time to close the gate again or raise the bridge. So he threw away his
key and fell in with the yeomen, who now began their retreat up the long
hill to the woods.

On this side the town, the road leading to the forest was long and
almost unprotected. The greenwood men were therefore in some distress,
for the archers shot at them from loop-holes in the walls, and the
pikemen were reinforced by a company of mounted men from the castle. But
the outlaws retreated stubbornly and now and again turned to hold their
pursuers at bay by a volley of arrows. Stutely was in their midst,
fighting with the energy of two; and the little palmer was there also,
but took no part save to keep close to Robin’s side and mutter silent
words as though in prayer.

Robin put his horn to his lips to sound a rally, when a flying arrow
from the enemy pierced his hand. The palmer gave a little cry and sprang
forward. The Sheriff, who followed close with the men on horseback, also
saw the wound and gave a great huzza.

“Ha! you will shoot no more bows for a season, master outlaw!” he
shouted.

“You lie!” retorted Robin fiercely, wrenching the shaft from his hand
despite the streaming blood; “I have saved one shot for you all this
day. Here take it!”

And he fitted the same arrow, which had wounded him, upon the string
of his bow and let it fly toward the Sheriff’s head. The Sheriff fell
forward upon his horse in mortal terror, but not so quickly as to escape
unhurt. The sharp point laid bare a deep gash upon his scalp and must
certainly have killed him if it had come closer.

The fall of the Sheriff discomfited his followers for the moment, and
Robin’s men took this chance to speed on up the hill. The palmer had
whipped out a small white handkerchief and tried to staunch Robin’s
wound as they went. At sight of the palmer’s hand, Robin turned with a
start, and pushed back the other’s hood.

“Marian!” he exclaimed, “you here!”

It was indeed Maid Marian, who had helped save Will, and been in the
stress of battle from the first. Now she hung her head as though caught
in wrong.

“I had to come, Robin,” she said simply, “and I knew you would not let
me come, else.”

Their further talk was interrupted by an exclamation from Will Scarlet.

“By the saints, we are trapped!” he said, and pointed to the top of the
hill, toward which they were pressing.

There from out a gray castle poured a troop of men, armed with pikes and
axes, who shouted and came running down upon them. At the same instant,
the Sheriff’s men also renewed the pursuit.

“Alas!” cried poor Marian, “we are undone! There is no way of escape!”

“Courage, dear heart!” said Robin, drawing her close to him. But his own
spirit sank as he looked about for some outlet.

Then--oh, joyful sight!--he recognized among the foremost of those
coming from the castle the once doleful knight, Sir Richard of the Lea.
He was smiling now, and greatly excited.

“A Hood! a Hood!” he cried; “a rescue! a rescue!” Never were there more
welcome sights and sounds than these. With a great cheer the outlaws
raced up the hill to meet their new friends; and soon the whole force
had gained the shelter of the castle. Bang! went the bridge as it swung
back, with great clanking of chains. Clash! went one great door upon the
other, as they shut in the outlaw band, and shut out the Sheriff, who
dashed up at the head of his men, his bandaged face streaked with blood
and inflamed with rage.




CHAPTER XXI

HOW SIR RICHARD OF THE LEA REPAID HIS DEBT

     The proud Sheriff loud ‘gan cry
     And said, “Thou traitor knight,
     Thou keepest here the king’s enemy
     Against the laws and right.”

“Open the gate!” shouted the Sheriff hoarsely, to the sentinel upon the
walls. “Open, I say, in the king’s name!”

“Why who are you to come thus brawling upon my premises?” asked a
haughty voice; and Sir Richard himself stepped forth upon the turret.

“You know me well, traitor knight!” said the Sheriff, “now give up into
my hands the enemy of the King whom you have sheltered against the laws
and right.”

“Fair and softly, sir,” quoth the knight smoothly. “I well avow that
I have done certain deeds this day. But I have done them upon mine
own land, which you now trespass upon; and I shall answer only to the
King--whom God preserve!--for my actions.”

“Thou soft-spoken villain!” said the Sheriff, still in a towering
passion. “I, also, serve the King; and if these outlaws are not given up
to me at once, I shall lay siege to the castle and burn it with fire.”

“First show me your warrants,” said Sir Richard curtly.

“My word is enough! Am I not Sheriff of Nottingham?”

“If you are, in sooth,” retorted the knight, “you should know that you
have no authority within my lands unless you bear the King’s order. In
the meantime, go mend your manners, lording.”

And Sir Richard snapped his fingers and disappeared from the walls. The
Sheriff, after lingering a few moments longer in hope of further parley,
was forced to withdraw, swearing fiercely.

“The King’s order!” muttered he. “That shall I have without delay,
as well as this upstart knight’s estates; for King Richard is lately
returned, I hear, from the Holy Land.”

Meanwhile the knight had gone back to Robin Hood, and the two men
greeted each other right gladly. “Well met, bold Robin!” cried he,
taking him in his arms. “Well met, indeed! The Lord has lately prospered
me, and I was minded this day to ride forth and repay my debt to you.”

“And so you have,” answered Robin gaily.

“Nay, ‘twas nothing--this small service!” said the knight. “I meant the
moneys coming to you.”

“They have all been repaid,” said Robin; “my lord of Hereford himself
gave them to me.”

“The exact sum?” asked the knight.

“The exact sum,” answered Robin, winking solemnly.

Sir Richard smiled, but said no more at the time. Robin was made to rest
until dinner should be served. Meanwhile a leech bound up his hand with
ointment, promising him that he should soon have its use again. Some
halfscore others of the yeomen had been hurt in the fight, but luckily
none of grave moment. They were all bandaged and made happy by bumpers
of ale.

At dinner Sir Richard presented Robin to his wife and son. The lady was
stately and gracious, and made much of Marian, whom she had known as
a little girl and who was now clothed more seemly for a dinner than in
monkish garments. The young esquire was a goodly youth and bade fair to
make as stout a knight as his father.

The feast was a joyous event. There were two long tables, and two
hundred men sat down at them, and ate and drank and afterward sang
songs. An hundred and forty of these men wore Lincoln green and called
Robin Hood their chief. Never, I ween, had there been a more gallant
company at table in Lea Castle!

That night the foresters tarried within the friendly walls, and the next
day took leave; though Sir Richard protested that they should have made
a longer stay. And he took Robin aside to his strong room and pressed
him again to take the four hundred golden pounds. But his guest was
firm.

“Keep the money, for it is your own,” said Robin; “I have but made the
Bishop return that which he extorted unjustly.”

Sir Richard thanked him in a few earnest words, and asked him and all
his men to visit the armory, before they departed. And therein they saw,
placed apart, an hundred and forty stout yew bows of cunning make, with
fine waxen silk strings; and an hundred and forty sheaves of arrows.
Every shaft was a just ell long, set with peacock’s feathers, and
notched with silver. And Sir Richard’s fair lady came forward and with
her own hands gave each yeoman a bow and a sheaf.

“In sooth, these are poor presents we have made you, good Robin Hood,”
 said Sir Richard; “but they carry with them a thousand times their
weight in gratitude.”

The Sheriff made good his threat to inform the King. Forth rode he
to London town upon the week following, his scalp wound having healed
sufficiently to permit him to travel. This time he did not seek out
Prince John, but asked audience with King Richard of the Lion Heart
himself. His Majesty had but lately returned from the crusades, and was
just then looking into the state of his kingdom. So the Sheriff found
ready audience.

Then to him the Sheriff spoke at length concerning Robin Hood; how that
for many months the outlaws had defied the King, and slain the King’s
deer; how Robin had gathered about him the best archers in all the
countryside; and, finally, how the traitorous knight Sir Richard of the
Lea had rescued the band when capture seemed certain, and refused to
deliver them up to justice.

The King heard him through with attention and quoth he:

“Meseems I have heard of this same Robin Hood, and his men, and also
seen somewhat of their prowess. Did not these same outlaws shoot in a
royal Tourney at Finsbury field?”

“They did, Your Majesty, under a royal amnesty.”

In this speech the Sheriff erred, for the King asked quickly,

“How came they last to the Fair at Nottingham--by stealth?”

“Yes, Your Majesty.”

“Did you forbid them to come?”

“No, Your Majesty. That is--”

“Speak out!”

“For the good of the shire,” began the Sheriff again, falteringly,
“we did proclaim an amnesty; but ‘twas because these men had proved a
menace--”

“Now by my halidom!” quoth the King, while his brow grew black. “Such
treachery would be unknown in the camp of the Saracen; and yet we call
ourselves a Christian people!”

The Sheriff kept silence through very fear and shame; then the King
began speech again:

“Nathless, my lord Sheriff, we promise to look into this matter. Those
outlaws must be taught that there is but one King in England, and that
he stands for the law.”

So the Sheriff was dismissed, with very mixed feelings, and went his way
home to Nottingham town. A fortnight later the King began to make good
his word, by riding with a small party of knights to Lea Castle. Sir
Richard was advised of the cavalcade’s approach, and quickly recognized
his royal master in the tall knight who rode in advance. Hasting to open
wide his castle gates he went forth to meet the King and fell on one
knee and kissed his stirrup. For Sir Richard, also, had been with the
King to the Holy Land, and they had gone on many adventurous quests
together.

The King bade him rise, and dismounted from his own horse to greet him
as a brother in arms; and arm-in-arm they went into the castle, while
bugles and trumpets sounded forth joyous welcome in honor of the great
occasion.

After the King had rested and supped, he turned upon the knight and with
grave face inquired:

“What is this I hear about your castle’s becoming a nest and harbor for
outlaws?”

The Sir Richard of the Lea, divining that the Sheriff had been at the
King’s ear with his story, made a clean breast of all he knew; how that
the outlaws had befriended him in sore need--as they had befriended
others--and how that he had given them only knightly protection in
return.

The King liked the story well, for his own soul was one of chivalry.
And he asked other questions about Robin Hood, and heard of the ancient
wrong done his father before him, and of Robin’s own enemies, and of his
manner of living.

“In sooth,” cried King Richard, springing up, “I must see this bold
fellow for myself! An you will entertain my little company, and be ready
to sally forth, upon the second day, in quest of me if need were, I
shall e’en fare alone into the greenwood to seek an adventure with him.”

But of this adventure you shall be told in the next tale; for I have
already shown you how Sir Richard of the Lea repaid his debt, with
interest.




CHAPTER XXII

HOW KING RICHARD CAME TO SHERWOOD FOREST

     King Richard hearing of the pranks
     Of Robin Hood and his men,
     He much admired and more desired
     To see both him and them.

     Then Robin takes a can of ale:
     “Come let us now begin;
     And every man shall have his can;
     Here’s a health unto the King!”

Friar Tuck had nursed Little John’s wounded knee so skilfully that it
was now healed. In sooth, the last part of the nursing depended more
upon strength than skill; for it consisted chiefly of holding down the
patient, by main force, to his cot. Little John had felt so well that he
had insisted upon getting up before the wound was healed; and he would
have done so, if the friar had not piled some holy books upon his legs
and sat upon his stomach.

Under this vigorous treatment Little John was constrained to lie quiet
until the friar gave him leave to get up. At last he had this leave, and
he and the friar went forth to join the rest of the band, who were right
glad to see them, you may be sure. They sat around a big fire, for ‘twas
a chilly evening, and they feasted and made merry, in great content.

A cold rain set in, later, but the friar wended his way back, nathless,
to his little hermitage. There he made himself a cheerful blaze, and
changed his dripping robe, and had sat himself down, with a sigh of
satisfaction, before a tankard of hot mulled wine and a pasty, when
suddenly a voice was heard on the outside, demanding admission. His
kennel of dogs set up furious uproar, on the instant, by way of proving
the fact of a stranger’s presence.

“Now by Saint Peter!” growled the friar, “who comes here at this
unseemly hour? Does he take this for a hostelry? Move on, friend, else
my mulled wine will get cold!”

So saying he put the tankard to his lips, when a thundering rap sounded
upon the door-panel, making it to quiver, and causing Tuck almost to
drop his tankard; while an angry voice shouted, “Ho! Within there! Open,
I say!”

“Go your way in peace!” roared back the friar; “I can do nothing for
you. ‘Tis but a few miles to Gamewell, if you know the road.”

“But I do not know the road, and if I did I would not budge another
foot. ‘Tis wet without and dry within. So open, without further parley!”

“A murrain seize you for disturbing a holy man in his prayers!” muttered
Tuck savagely. Nathless, he was fain to unbar the door in order to
keep it from being battered down. Then lighting a torch at his fire and
whistling for one of his dogs, he strode forth to see who his visitor
might be.

The figure of a tall knight clad in a black coat of mail, with plumed
helmet, stood before him. By his side stood his horse, also caparisoned
in rich armor.

“Have you no supper, brother?” asked the Black Knight curtly. “I must
beg of you a bed and a bit of roof, for this night, and fain would
refresh my body ere I sleep.”

“I have no room that even your steed would deign to accept, Sir Knight;
and naught save a crust of bread and pitcher of water.”

“I’ faith, I can smell better fare than that, brother, and must e’en
force my company upon you, though I shall recompense it for gold in the
name of the church. As for my horse, let him but be blanketed and put on
the sheltered side of the house.”

And without further parley the knight boldly strode past Tuck and his
dog and entered the hermitage. Something about his masterful air pleased
Tuck, in spite of his churlishness.

“Sit you down, Sir Knight,” quoth he, “and I will fasten up up your
steed, and find him somewhat in the shape of grain. Half, also, of my
bed and board is yours, this night; but we shall see later who is the
better man, and is to give the orders!”

“With all my soul!” said the knight, laughing. “I can pay my keeping in
blows or gold as you prefer.”

The friar presently returned and drew up a small table near the fire.

“Now, Sir Knight,” quoth he, “put off your sword and helm and such other
war-gear as it pleases you, and help me lay this table, for I am passing
hungry.”

The knight did as he was told, and put aside the visor which had hid
his face. He was a bronzed and bearded man with blue eyes, and hair shot
with gold, haughty but handsome withal.

Then once again the priest sat him down to his pasty and mulled wine,
right hopefully. He spoke his grace with some haste, and was surprised
to hear his guest respond fittingly in the Latin tongue. Then they
attacked the wine and pasty valiantly, and the Black Knight made good
his word of being in need of refreshment. Tuck looked ruefully at the
rapidly disappearing food, but came to grudge it not, by reason of the
stories with which his guest enlivened the meal. The wine and warmth of
the room had cheered them both, and they were soon laughing uproariously
as the best of comrades in the world. The Black Knight, it seemed, had
traveled everywhere. He had been on crusades, had fought the courteous
Saladin, had been in prison, and often in peril. But now he spoke of
it lightly, and laughed it off, and made himself so friendly that Friar
Tuck was like to choke with merriment. So passed the time till late; and
the two fell asleep together, one on each side of the table which had
been cleared to the platters.

In the morning Friar Tuck awoke disposed to be surly, but was speedily
mollified by the sight of the Black Knight, who had already risen gay as
a lark, washed his face and hands, and was now stirring a hot gruel over
the fire.

“By my faith, I make a sorry host!” cried Tuck springing to his feet.
And later as they sat at breakfast, he added, “I want not your gold, of
which you spoke last night; but instead I will do what I can to speed
you on your way whenever you wish to depart.”

“Then tell me,” said the knight, “how I may find Robin Hood the outlaw;
for I have a message to him from the King. All day yesterday I sought
him, but found him not.”

Friar Tuck lifted up his hands in holy horror. “I am a lover of peace,
Sir Knight, and do not consort with Robin’s bold fellows.”

“Nay, I think no harm of Master Hood,” said the knight; “but much I
yearn to have speed with him in mine own person.”

“If that be all, mayhap I can guide you to his haunts,” said Tuck, who
foresaw in this knight a possible gold-bag for Robin. “In sooth, I could
not well live in these woods without hearing somewhat of the outlaws;
but matters of religion are my chief joy and occupation.”

“I will go with you, brother,” said the Black Knight.

So without more ado they went their way into the forest, the knight
riding upon his charger, and Tuck pacing along demurely by his side.

The day had dawned clear and bright, and now with the sun a good three
hours high a sweet autumn fragrance was in the air. The wind had just
that touch of coolness in it which sets the hunter’s blood to tingling;
and every creature of nature seemed bounding with joyous life.

The knight sniffed the fresh air in delight.

“By my halidom!” quoth he; “but the good greenwood is the best place
to live in, after all! What court or capital can equal this, for
full-blooded men?”

“None of this earth,” replied Tuck smilingly. And once more his heart
warmed toward the courteous stranger.

They had not proceeded more than three or four miles along the way from
Fountain Abbey to Barnesdale, when of a sudden the bushes just ahead of
them parted and a well-knit man with curling brown hair stepped into the
road and laid his hand upon the knight’s bridle.

It was Robin Hood. He had seen Friar Tuck, a little way back, and
shrewdly suspected his plan. Tuck, however, feigned not to know him at
all.

“Hold!” cried Robin; “I am in charge of the highway this day, and must
exact an accounting from all passersby.”

“Who is it bids me hold?” asked the knight quietly. “I am not i’ the
habit of yielding to one man.”

“Then here are others to keep me company,” said Robin clapping his
hands. And instantly a half-score other stalwart fellows came out of the
bushes and stood beside him.

“We be yeomen of the forest, Sir Knight,” continued Robin, “and live
under the greenwood tree. We have no means of support--thanks to the
tyranny of our over-lords--other than the aid which fat churchmen and
goodly knights like yourselves can give. And as ye have churches and
rents, both, and gold in great plenty, we beseech ye for Saint Charity
to give us some of your spending.”

“I am but a poor monk, good sir!” said Friar Tuck in a whining voice,
“and am on my way to the shrine of Saint Dunstan, if your worshipfulness
will permit.”

“Tarry a space with us,” answered Robin, biting back a smile, “and we
will speed you on your way.”

The Black Knight now spoke again. “But we are messengers of the King,”
 quoth he; “His Majesty himself tarries near here and would have speech
with Robin Hood.”

“God save the King!” said Robin, doffing his cap loyally; “and all that
wish him well! I am Robin Hood, but I say cursed be the man who denies
our liege King’s sovereignty!”

“Have a care!” said the knight, “or you shall curse yourself!”

“Nay, not so,” replied Robin curtly; “the King has no more devoted
subject than I. Nor have I despoiled aught of his save, mayhap, a few
deer for my hunger. My chief war is against the clergy and barons of the
land who bear down upon the poor. But I am glad,” he continued, “that I
have met you here; and before we end you shall be my friend and taste of
our greenwood cheer.”

“But what is the reckoning?” asked the knight. “For I am told that some
of your feasts are costly.”

“Nay,” responded Robin waving his hands, “you are from the King.
Nathless--how much money is in your purse?”

“I have no more than forty gold pieces, seeing that I have lain a
fortnight at Nottingham with the King, and have spent some goodly
amounts upon other lordings,” replied the knight.

Robin took the forty pounds and gravely counted it. One half he gave to
his men and bade them drink the King’s health with it. The other half he
handed back to the knight.

“Sir,” said he courteously, “have this for your spending. If you lie
with kings and lordings overmuch, you are like to need it.”

“Gramercy!” replied the other smiling. “And now lead on to your
greenwood hostelry.”

So Robin went on the one side of the knight’s steed, and Friar Tuck on
the other, and the men went before and behind till they came to the open
glade before the caves of Barnesdale. Then Robin drew forth his bugle
and winded the three signal blasts of the band. Soon there came a
company of yeomen with its leader, and another, and a third, and a
fourth, till there were sevenscore yeomen in sight. All were dressed
in new livery of Lincoln green, and carried new bows in their hands and
bright short swords at their belts. And every man bent his knee to Robin
Hood ere taking his place before the board, which was already set.

A handsome dark-haired page stood at Robin’s right hand to pour his wine
and that of the knightly guest; while the knight marveled much at all he
saw, and said within himself:

“These men of Robin Hood’s give him more obedience than my fellows give
to me.”

At the signal from Robin the dinner began. There was venison and fowl
and fish and wheaten cake and ale and red wine in great plenty, and
‘twas a goodly sight to see the smiles upon the hungry yeomen’s faces.

First they listened to an unctuous grace from Friar Tuck, and then Robin
lifted high a tankard of ale.

“Come, let us now begin,” quoth he, “and every man shall have his can.
In honor of our guest who comes with royal word, here’s a health unto
the King!”

The guest responded heartily to this toast, and round about the board it
went, the men cheering noisily for King Richard!

After the feast was over, Robin turned to his guest and said, “Now you
shall see what life we lead, so that you may report faithfully, for good
or bad, unto the King.”

So at a signal from him, the men rose up and smartly bent their bows for
practice, while the knight was greatly astonished at the smallness of
the their targets. A wand was set up, far down the glade, and thereon
was balanced a garland of roses. Whosoever failed to speed his shaft
through the garland, without knocking it off the wand, was to submit to
a buffet from the hand of Friar Tuck.

“Ho, ho!” cried the knight, as his late traveling companion rose up and
bared his brawny arm ready for service; “so you, my friend, are Friar
Tuck!”

“I have not gainsaid it,” replied Tuck growling at having betrayed
himself. “But chastisement is a rule of the church, and I am seeking the
good of these stray sheep.”

The knight said no more, though his eyes twinkled; and the shooting
began.

David of Doncaster shot first and landed safely through the rose
garland. Then came Allan-a-Dale and Little John and Stutely and Scarlet
and many of the rest, while the knight held his breath from very
amazement. Each fellow shot truly through the garland, until Middle the
tinker--not to be outdone--stepped up for a trial. But alas! while
he made a fair shot for a townsman, the arrow never came within a
hand-breath of the outer rim of the garland.

“Come hither, fellow,” said Little John coaxingly. “The priest would
bless thee with his open hand.”

Then because Middle made a wry face, as though he had already received
the buffet, and loitered in his steps, Arthur-a-Bland and Will Stutely
seized him by the arms and stood him before the friar. Tuck’s big arm
flashed through the air--“whoof!” and stopped suddenly against the
tinker’s ear; while Middle himself went rolling over and over on the
grass. He was stopped by a small bush, and up he sat, thrusting his head
through it, rubbing his ear and blinking up at the sky as though the
stars had fallen and struck him. The yeomen roared with merriment, and
as for the knight, he laughed till the tears came out of his blue eyes
and rolled down his face.

After Middle’s mishap, others of the band seemed to lose their balance,
and fared in the same fashion. The garland would topple over in a most
impish way at every breath, although the arrows went through it. So
Middle ‘gan to feel better when he saw this one and that one tumbling on
the sward.

At last came Robin’s turn. He shot carefully, but as ill luck would have
it the shaft was ill-feathered and swerved sidewise so that it missed
the garland by full three fingers. Then a great roar went up from the
whole company; for ‘twas rare that they saw their leader miss his mark.
Robin flung his bow upon the ground from very vexation.

“A murrain take it!” quoth he. “The arrow was sadly winged. I felt the
poor feather upon it as it left my fingers!”

Then suddenly seizing his bow again, he sped three shafts as fast as he
could sent them, and every one went clean through the garland.

“By Saint George!” muttered the knight. “Never before saw I such
shooting in all Christendom!”

The band cheered heartily at these last shots; but Will Scarlet came up
gravely to Robin.

“Pretty shooting, master!” quoth he, “but ‘twill not save you from
paying for the bad arrow. So walk up and take your medicine!”

“Nay, that may not be!” protested Robin. “The good friar belongs to
my company and has no authority to lift hands against me. But you, Sir
Knight, stand as it were for the King. I pray you, serve out my blow.”

“Not so!” said Friar Tuck. “My son, you forget I stand for the church,
which is greater even than the King.”

“Not in merry England,” said the knight in a deep voice. Then rising to
his feet, he added, “I stand ready to serve you, Master Hood.”

“Now out upon ye for an upstart knight!” cried Friar Tuck. “I told you
last night, sirrah, that we should yet see who was the better man! So we
will e’en prove it now, and thus settle who is to pay Robin Hood.”

“Good!” said Robin, “for I want not to start a dispute between church
and state.”

“Good!” also said the knight. “‘Tis an easy way to end prattling. Come,
friar, strike and ye dare. I will give you first blow.”

“You have the advantage of an iron pot on your head and gloves on your
hands,” said the friar; “but have at ye! Down you shall go, if you were
Goliath of Gath.”

Once more the priest’s brawny arm flashed through the air, and struck
with a “whoof!” But to the amazement of all, the knight did not budge
from his tracks, though the upper half of his body swerved slightly to
ease the force of the blow. A loud shout burst from the yeomen at this,
for the friar’s fist was proverbial, and few of those present had not
felt the force of it in times past.

“Now ‘tis my turn,” said his antagonist coolly, casting aside his
gauntlet. And with one blow of his fist the knight sent the friar
spinning to the ground.

If there had been uproar and shouting before, it was as naught to the
noise which now broke forth. Every fellow held his sides or rolled upon
the ground from laughter; every fellow, save one, and that was Robin
Hood.

“Out of the frying-pan into the fire!” thought he. “I wish I had let the
friar box my ears, after all!”

Robin’s plight did, indeed, seem a sorry one, before the steel muscles
of his stranger. But he was saved from a tumble heels over head by
an unlooked-for diversion. A horn winded in the glade, and a party of
knights were seen approaching.

“To your arms!” cried Robin, hurriedly seizing his sword and bow.

“‘Tis Sir Richard of the Lea!” cried another, as the troop came nearer.

And so it was. Sir Richard spurred forward his horse and dashed up to
the camp while the outlaws stood at stiff attention. When he had come
near the spot where the Black Knight stood, he dismounted and knelt
before him.

“I trust Your Majesty has not needed our arms before,” he said humbly.

“It is the King!” cried Will Scarlet, falling upon his knees.

“The King!” echoed Robin Hood after a moment of dumb wonderment; and he
and all his men bent reverently upon their knees, as one man.




CHAPTER XXIII

HOW ROBIN HOOD AND MAID MARIAN WERE WED

     “Stand up again,” then said the King,
     “I’ll thee thy pardon give;
     Stand up, my friend, who can contend,
     When I give leave to live?”

     Then Robin Hood began a health
     To Marian, his only dear,
     And his yeomen all, both comely and tall,
     Did quickly bring up the rear.

“Your pardon, sire!” exclaimed Robin Hood. “Pardon, from your royal
bounty, for these my men who stand ready to serve you all your days!”

Richard of the Lion Heart looked grimly about over the kneeling band.

“Is it as your leader says?” he asked.

“Aye, my lord King!” burst from sevenscore throats at once.

“We be not outlaws from choice alone,” continued Robin; “but have
been driven to outlawry through oppression. Grant us grace and royal
protection, and we will forsake the greenwood and follow the King.”

Richard’s eyes sparkled as he looked from one to another of this
stalwart band, and he thought within himself that here, indeed, was a
royal bodyguard worth the while.

“Swear!” he said in his full rich voice; “swear that you, Robin Hood,
and all your men from this day henceforth will serve the King!”

“We swear!” came once more the answering shout from the yeomen.

“Arise, then,” said King Richard. “I give you all free pardon, and will
speedily put your service to the test. For I love such archers as you
have shown yourselves to be, and it were a sad pity to decree such men
to death. England could not produce the like again, for many a day. But,
in sooth, I cannot allow you to roam in the forest and shoot my deer;
nor to take the law of the land into your own hands. Therefore, I now
appoint you to be Royal Archers and mine own especial body-guard. There
be one or two civil matters to settle with certain Norman noblemen,
in which I crave your aid. Thereafter, the half of your number, as
may later be determined, shall come back to these woodlands as Royal
Foresters. Mayhap you will show as much zeal in protecting my preserves
as you have formerly shown in hunting them. Where, now, is that outlaw
known as Little John? Stand forth!”

“Here, sire,” quoth the giant, doffing his cap.

“Good master Little John,” said the King, looking him over approvingly.
“Could your weak sinews stand the strain of an office in the shire? If
so, you are this day Sheriff of Nottingham; and I trust you will make a
better official than the man you relieve.”

“I shall do my best, sire,” said Little John, great astonishment and
gladness in his heart.

“Master Scarlet, stand forth,” said the King; and then addressing him:
“I have heard somewhat of your tale,” quoth he, “and that your father
was the friend of my father. Now, therefore, accept the royal pardon and
resume the care of your family estates; for your father must be growing
old. And come you to London next Court day and we shall see if there be
a knighthood vacant.”

Likewise the King called for Will Stutely and made him Chief of the
Royal Archers. Then he summoned Friar Tuck to draw near.

“I crave my King’s pardon,” said the priest, humbly enough; “for who am
I to lift my hand against the Lord’s anointed?”

“Nay, the Lord sent the smiter to thee without delay,” returned Richard
smiling; “and ‘tis not for me to continue a quarrel between church and
state. So what can I do for you in payment of last night’s hospitality?
Can I find some fat living where there are no wicked to chastise, and
where the work is easy and comfortable?”

“Not so, my lord,” replied Tuck. “I wish only for peace in this life.
Mine is a simple nature and I care not for the fripperies and follies
of court life. Give me a good meal and a cup of right brew, health, and
enough for the day, and I ask no more.”

Richard sighed. “You ask the greatest thing in the world,
brother--contentment. It is not mine to give or to deny. But ask your
God for it, an if belike he grant it, then ask it also in behalf of your
King.” He glanced around once more at the foresters. “Which one of you
is Allan-a-Dale?” he asked; and Allan came forward. “So,” said the King
with sober face, “you are that errant minstrel who stole a bride at
Plympton, despite her would-be groom and attending Bishop. I heard
something of this in former days. Now what excuse have you to make?”

“Only that I loved her, sire, and she loved me,” said Allan, simply;
“and the Norman lord would have married her perforce, because of her
lands.”

“Which have since been forfeited by the Bishop of Hereford,” added
Richard. “But my lord Bishop must disgorge them; and from tomorrow you
and Mistress Dale are to return to them and live in peace and loyalty.
And if ever I need your harp at Court, stand ready to attend me, and
bring also the lady. Speaking of ladies,” he continued, turning to Robin
Hood, who had stood silent, wondering if a special punishment was
being reserved for him, “did you not have a sweetheart who was once at
Court--one, Mistress Marian? What has become of her, that you should
have forgotten her?”

“Nay, Your Majesty,” said the black-eyed page coming forward blushingly;
“Robin has not forgotten me!”

“So!” said the King, bending to kiss her small hand in all gallantry.
“Verily, as I have already thought within myself, this Master Hood is
better served than the King in his palace! But are you not the only
child of the late Earl of Huntingdon?”

“I am, sire, though there be some who say that Robin Hood’s father
was formerly the rightful Earl of Huntingdon. Nathless, neither he is
advantaged nor I, for the estates are confiscate.”

“Then they shall be restored forthwith!” cried the King; “and lest you
two should revive the ancient quarrel over them, I bestow them upon you
jointly. Come forward, Robin Hood.”

Robin came and knelt before his king. Richard drew his sword and touched
him upon the shoulder.

“Rise, Robin Fitzooth, Earl of Huntingdon!” he exclaimed, while a mighty
cheer arose from the band and rent the air of the forest. “The first
command I give you, my lord Earl,” continued the King when quiet was
restored, “is to marry Mistress Marian without delay.”

“May I obey all Your Majesty’s commands as willingly!” cried the new
Earl of Huntingdon, drawing the old Earl’s daughter close to him. “The
ceremony shall take place to-morrow, an this maid is willing.”

“She makes little protest,” said the King; “so I shall e’en give away
the bride myself!”

Then the King chatted with others of the foresters, and made himself as
one of them for the evening, rejoicing that he could have this careless
freedom of the woods. And Much, the miller’s son, and Arthur-a-Bland,
and Middle, and Stutely and Scarlet and Little John and others played
at the quarter-staff, giving and getting many lusty blows. Then as
the shades of night drew on, the whole company--knights and
foresters--supped and drank around a blazing fire, while Allen sang
sweetly to the thrumming of the harp, and the others joined in the
chorus.

‘Twas a happy, care-free night--this last one together under the
greenwood tree. Robin could not help feeling an undertone of sadness
that it was to be the last; for the charm of the woodland was still upon
him. But he knew ‘twas better so, and that the new life with Marian and
in the service of his King would bring its own joys.

Then the night deepened, the fire sank, but was replenished and the
company lay down to rest. The King, at his own request, spent the night
in the open. Thus they slept--King and subject alike--out under the
stars, cared for lovingly by Nature, kind mother of us all.

In the morning the company was early astir and on their way to
Nottingham. It was a goodly cavalcade. First rode King Richard of the
Lion Heart, with his tall figure set forth by the black armor and waving
plume in his helm. Then came Sir Richard of the Lea with fourscore
knights and men-at-arms. And after them came Robin Hood and Maid Marian
riding upon milk-white steeds. Allan-a-Dale also escorted Mistress Dale
on horseback, for she was to be matron-of-honor at the wedding. These
were followed by sevenscore archers clad in their bravest Lincoln green,
and with their new bows unstrung in token of peace.

Outside the gates of Nottingham town they were halted.

“Who comes here?” asked the warder’s surly voice.

“Open to the King of England!” came back the clear answer, and the gates
were opened and the bridge let down without delay.

Almost before the company had crossed the moat the news spread through
the town like wildfire.

“The King is here! The King is here, and hath taken Robin Hood!”

From every corner flocked the people to see the company pass; and wildly
did they cheer for the King, who rode smilingly with bared head down
through the market-place.

At the far end of it, he was met by the Sheriff who came up puffing in
his haste to do the King honor. He fairly turned green with rage when he
saw Sir Richard of the Lea and Robin Hood in the royal company, but made
low obeisance to his master.

“Sir Sheriff,” quoth the King, “I have come to rid the shire of outlaws,
according to my promise. There be none left, for all have now taken
service with their King. And lest there should be further outbreak,
I have determined to place in charge of this shire a man who fears
no other man in it. Master Little John is hereby created Sheriff of
Nottingham, and you will turn over the keys to him forthwith.”

The Sheriff bowed, but dared utter no word. Then the King turned to the
Bishop of Hereford, who had also come up to pay his respects.

“Harkee, my lord Bishop,” quoth he, “the stench of your evil actions
had reached our nostrils. We shall demand strict accounting for certain
seizures of the lands and certain acts of oppression which ill become a
churchman. But of this later. This afternoon you must officiate at the
wedding of two of our company, in Nottingham Church. So make you ready.”

The Bishop also bowed and departed, glad to escape a severer censure for
the time.

The company then rode on to the Mansion House, where the King held high
levee through all the noon hours, and the whole town made a holiday.

In the afternoon the way from the Mansion House to Nottingham Church was
lined with cheering people, as the wedding party passed by. The famous
bowmen were gazed at as curiously as though they had been wild animals,
but were cheered none the less. Robin who had long been held in secret
liking was now doubly popular since he had the King’s favor.

Along the way ahead of the King and the smiling bride and groom to be
ran little maids strewing flowers; while streamers floated in greeting
from the windows. I ween, the only hearts that were not glad this day
were those of the old Sheriff, and of his proud daughter, who peered
between the shutters of her window and was like to eat out her heart
from envy and hatred.

At last the party reached the church, where the King dismounted lightly
from his horse and helped the bride to alight; while Will Scarlet,
the best man, assisted Mistress Dale. Within the church they found
the Bishop robed in state, and by his side Friar Tuck who had been
especially deputed to assist.

The service was said in Latin, while the organ pealed forth softly. The
King gave away the bride, as he had said, and afterwards claimed first
kiss for his pains. Then the happy party dispersed, and Robin and Marian
passed out again through the portal, man and wife.

Out through the cheering streets they fared, while the greenwood men ran
ahead and flung gold pennies right and left in their joy, and bade the
people drink the health of the young couple and the King. Then the
whole party took horse at Will Scarlet’s earnest wish, and went down to
Gamewell Lodge, where the old Squire George wept for joy at seeing his
son and the King and the wedding--party. That night they spent there,
and feasted, and the next day, Sir Richard of the Lea claimed them.

And thus, amid feasting and rejoicing and kingly favor, Robin Hood, the
new Earl of Huntingdon, and his bride began their wedded life.




CHAPTER XXIV

HOW ROBIN HOOD MET HIS DEATH

     “Give me my bent bow in my hand,
     And a broad arrow I’ll let flee;
     And where this arrow is taken up,
     There shall my grave digg’d be.”

Now by good rights this story should end with the wedding of Robin Hood
and Maid Marian; for do not many pleasant tales end with a wedding and
the saying, “and they lived happy ever after.”

But this is a true account--in so far as we can find the quaint old
ballads which tell of it--and so we must follow one more of these songs
and learn how Robin, after living many years longer, at last came to
seek his grave. And the story of it runs in this wise.

Robin Hood and his men, now the Royal Archers, went with King Richard of
the Lion Heart through England settling certain private disputes which
had arisen among the Norman barons while the King was gone to the Holy
Land. Then the King proceeded amid great pomp and rejoicing to the
palace at London, and Robin, the new Earl of Huntingdon, brought his
Countess thither, where she became one of the finest ladies of the
Court.

The Royal Archers were now divided into two bands, and one-half of them
were retained in London, while the other half returned to Sherwood and
Barnesdale, there to guard the King’s preserves.

Several months passed by, and Robin began to chafe under the restraint
of city life. He longed for the fresh pure air of the greenwood, and
the rollicking society of his yeomen. One day, upon seeing some lads
at archery practice upon a green, he could not help but lament, saying,
“Woe is me! I fear my hand is fast losing its old time cunning at the
bow-string!”

Finally he became so distraught that he asked leave to travel in foreign
lands, and this was granted him. He took Maid Marian with him, and
together they went through many strange countries. Finally in an Eastern
land a great grief came upon Robin. Marian sickened of a plague and
died. They had been married but five years, and Robin felt as though all
the light had gone out of his life.

He wandered about the world for a few months longer, trying to forget
his grief, then came back to the court, at London, and sought some
commission in active service. But unluckily, Richard was gone again upon
his adventures, and Prince John, who acted as Regent, had never been
fond of Robin. He received him with a sarcastic smile.

“Go forth into the greenwood,” said he, coldly, “and kill some more of
the King’s deer. Belike, then, the King will make you Prime Minister, at
the very least, upon his return.”

The taunt fired Robin’s blood. He had been in a morose mood, ever since
his dear wife’s death. He answered Prince John hotly, and the Prince
bade his guards seize him and cast him into the Tower.

After lying there for a few weeks, he was released by the faithful
Stutely and the remnant of the Royal Archers, and all together they fled
the city and made their way to the greenwood. There Robin blew the old
familiar call, which all had known and loved so well. Up came running
the remainder of the band, who had been Royal Foresters, and when they
saw their old master they embraced his knees and kissed his hands, and
fairly cried for joy that he had come again to them. And one and all
forswore fealty to Prince John, and lived quietly with Robin in the
greenwood, doing harm to none and only awaiting the time when King
Richard should come again.

But King Richard came not again, and would never need his Royal Guard
more. Tidings presently reached them, of how he had met his death in a
foreign land, and how John reigned as King in his stead. The proof of
these events followed soon after, when there came striding through the
glade the big, familiar form of Little John.

“Art come to arrest us?” called out Robin, as he ran forward and
embraced his old comrade.

“Nay, I am not come as the Sheriff of Nottingham, thanks be,” answered
Little John. “The new King has deposed me, and ‘tis greatly to
my liking, for I have long desired to join you here again in the
greenwood.”

Then were the rest of the band right glad at this news, and toasted
Little John royally.

The new King waged fierce war upon the outlaws, soon after this, and
sent so many scouting parties into Sherwood and Barnesdale that Robin
and his men left these woods for a time and went into Derbyshire, near
Haddon Hall. A curious pile of stone is shown to this day as the ruins
of Robin’s Castle, where the bold outlaw is believed to have defied his
enemies for a year or more. At any rate King John found so many troubles
of his own, after a time, that he ceased troubling the outlaws.

But in one of the last sorties Robin was wounded. The cut did not seem
serious, and healed over the top; but it left a lurking fever. Daily his
strength ebbed away from him, until he was in sore distress.

One day as he rode along on horseback, near Kirklees Abbey, he was
seized with so violent a rush of blood to the head that he reeled and
came near falling from his saddle. He dismounted weakly and knocked at
the Abbey gate. A woman shrouded in black peered forth.

“Who are you that knock here? For we allow no man within these walls,”
 she said.

“Open, for the love of Heaven!” he begged. “I am Robin Hood, ill of a
fever and in sore straits.”

At the name of Robin Hood the woman started back, and then, as though
bethinking herself, unbarred the door and admitted him. Assisting his
fainting frame up a flight of stairs and into a front room, she loosed
his collar and bathed his face until he was revived. Then she spoke
hurriedly in a low voice:

“Your fever will sink, if you are bled. See, I have provided a lancet
and will open your veins, while you lie quiet.”

So she bled him, and he fell into a stupor which lasted nearly all that
day, so that he awoke weak and exhausted from loss of blood.

Now there is a dispute as to this abbess who bled him. Some say that
she did it in all kindness of heart; while others aver that she was none
other than the former Sheriff’s daughter, and found her revenge at last
in this cruel deed.

Be that as it may, Robin’s eyes swam from very weakness when he awoke.

He called wearily for help, but there was no response. He looked
longingly through the window at the green of the forest; but he was too
weak to make the leap that would be needed to reach the ground.

     He then bethought him of his horn,
     Which hung down at his knee;
     He set his horn unto his mouth,
     And blew out weak blasts three.

Little John was out in the forest near by, or the blasts would never
have been heard. At their sound he sprang to his feet.

“Woe! woe!” he cried, “I fear my master is near dead, he blows so
wearily!”

So he made haste and came running up to the door of the abbey, and
knocked loudly for admittance. Failing to get reply, he burst in the
door with frenzied blows of his mighty fist, and soon came running up
to the room where Robin lay, white and faint. “Alas, dear master!” cried
Little John in great distress; “I fear you have met with treachery! If
that be so, grant me one last boon, I pray.”

“What is it?” asked Robin.

“Let me burn Kirklees-Hall with fire, and all its nunnery.”

“Nay, good comrade,” answered Robin Hood gently, “I cannot grant such
a boon. The dear Christ bade us forgive all our enemies. Moreover,
you know I never hurt woman in all my life; nor man when in woman’s
company.”

He closed his eyes and fell back, so that his friend thought him dying.
The great tears fell from the giant’s eyes and wet his master’s hand.
Robin slowly rallied and seized his comrade’s outstretched arm.

“Lift me up, good Little John,” he said brokenly, “I want to smell
the air from the good greenwood once again. Give me my good yew
bow--here--here-and fix a broad arrow upon the string. Out yonder--among
the oaks--where this arrow shall fall--let them dig my grave.”

And with one last mighty effort he sped his shaft out of the open
window, straight and true, as in the days of old, till it struck the
largest oak of them all and dropped in the shadow of the trees. Then he
fell back upon the sobbing breast of his devoted friend.

“‘Tis the last!” he murmured, “tell the brave hearts to lay me there
with the green sod under my head and feet. And--let them lay--my bent
bow at my side, for it has made sweet music in mine ears.”

He rested a moment, and Little John scarce knew that he was alive. But
on a sudden Robin’s eye brightened, and he seemed to think himself back
once more with the band in the open forest glade. He struggled to rise.

“Ha! ‘tis a fine stag, Will! And Allan, thou never didst thrum the harp
more sweetly. How the light blazes! And Marian!--‘tis my Marian--come at
last!”

So died the body of Robin Hood; but his spirit lives on through the
centuries in the deathless ballads which are sung of him, and in the
hearts of men who love freedom and chivalry.

They buried him where his last arrow had fallen, and they set a stone to
mark the spot. And on the stone were graven these words:

     “Here underneath his little stone
     Lies Robert, Earl of Huntingdon;
     Never archer as he so good,
     And people called him Robin Hood.
     Such outlaws as he and his men
     Will England never see again.”
