Project Gutenberg's The Land That Time Forgot, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Land That Time Forgot

Author: Edgar Rice Burroughs

Posting Date: October 10, 2008 [EBook #551]
Release Date: June, 1996

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAND THAT TIME FORGOT ***




Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.









The Land that Time Forgot


By

Edgar Rice Burroughs




Chapter 1

It must have been a little after three o'clock in the afternoon that it
happened--the afternoon of June 3rd, 1916.  It seems incredible that
all that I have passed through--all those weird and terrifying
experiences--should have been encompassed within so short a span as
three brief months.  Rather might I have experienced a cosmic cycle,
with all its changes and evolutions for that which I have seen with my
own eyes in this brief interval of time--things that no other mortal
eye had seen before, glimpses of a world past, a world dead, a world so
long dead that even in the lowest Cambrian stratum no trace of it
remains.  Fused with the melting inner crust, it has passed forever
beyond the ken of man other than in that lost pocket of the earth
whither fate has borne me and where my doom is sealed. I am here and
here must remain.


After reading this far, my interest, which already had been stimulated
by the finding of the manuscript, was approaching the boiling-point.  I
had come to Greenland for the summer, on the advice of my physician,
and was slowly being bored to extinction, as I had thoughtlessly
neglected to bring sufficient reading-matter. Being an indifferent
fisherman, my enthusiasm for this form of sport soon waned; yet in the
absence of other forms of recreation I was now risking my life in an
entirely inadequate boat off Cape Farewell at the southernmost
extremity of Greenland.

Greenland!  As a descriptive appellation, it is a sorry joke--but my
story has nothing to do with Greenland, nothing to do with me; so I
shall get through with the one and the other as rapidly as possible.

The inadequate boat finally arrived at a precarious landing, the
natives, waist-deep in the surf, assisting.  I was carried ashore, and
while the evening meal was being prepared, I wandered to and fro along
the rocky, shattered shore.  Bits of surf-harried beach clove the worn
granite, or whatever the rocks of Cape Farewell may be composed of, and
as I followed the ebbing tide down one of these soft stretches, I saw
the thing.  Were one to bump into a Bengal tiger in the ravine behind
the Bimini Baths, one could be no more surprised than was I to see a
perfectly good quart thermos bottle turning and twisting in the surf of
Cape Farewell at the southern extremity of Greenland. I rescued it, but
I was soaked above the knees doing it; and then I sat down in the sand
and opened it, and in the long twilight read the manuscript, neatly
written and tightly folded, which was its contents.

You have read the opening paragraph, and if you are an imaginative
idiot like myself, you will want to read the rest of it; so I shall
give it to you here, omitting quotation marks--which are difficult of
remembrance.  In two minutes you will forget me.


My home is in Santa Monica.  I am, or was, junior member of my father's
firm.  We are ship-builders.  Of recent years we have specialized on
submarines, which we have built for Germany, England, France and the
United States.  I know a sub as a mother knows her baby's face, and
have commanded a score of them on their trial runs.  Yet my
inclinations were all toward aviation. I graduated under Curtiss, and
after a long siege with my father obtained his permission to try for
the Lafayette Escadrille.  As a stepping-stone I obtained an
appointment in the American ambulance service and was on my way to
France when three shrill whistles altered, in as many seconds, my
entire scheme of life.

I was sitting on deck with some of the fellows who were going into the
American ambulance service with me, my Airedale, Crown Prince Nobbler,
asleep at my feet, when the first blast of the whistle shattered the
peace and security of the ship.  Ever since entering the U-boat zone we
had been on the lookout for periscopes, and children that we were,
bemoaning the unkind fate that was to see us safely into France on the
morrow without a glimpse of the dread marauders.  We were young; we
craved thrills, and God knows we got them that day; yet by comparison
with that through which I have since passed they were as tame as a
Punch-and-Judy show.

I shall never forget the ashy faces of the passengers as they stampeded
for their life-belts, though there was no panic. Nobs rose with a low
growl.  I rose, also, and over the ship's side, I saw not two hundred
yards distant the periscope of a submarine, while racing toward the
liner the wake of a torpedo was distinctly visible.  We were aboard an
American ship--which, of course, was not armed.  We were entirely
defenseless; yet without warning, we were being torpedoed.

I stood rigid, spellbound, watching the white wake of the torpedo. It
struck us on the starboard side almost amidships.  The vessel rocked as
though the sea beneath it had been uptorn by a mighty volcano. We were
thrown to the decks, bruised and stunned, and then above the ship,
carrying with it fragments of steel and wood and dismembered human
bodies, rose a column of water hundreds of feet into the air.

The silence which followed the detonation of the exploding torpedo was
almost equally horrifying.  It lasted for perhaps two seconds, to be
followed by the screams and moans of the wounded, the cursing of the
men and the hoarse commands of the ship's officers.  They were
splendid--they and their crew.  Never before had I been so proud of my
nationality as I was that moment.  In all the chaos which followed the
torpedoing of the liner no officer or member of the crew lost his head
or showed in the slightest any degree of panic or fear.

While we were attempting to lower boats, the submarine emerged and
trained guns on us.  The officer in command ordered us to lower our
flag, but this the captain of the liner refused to do. The ship was
listing frightfully to starboard, rendering the port boats useless,
while half the starboard boats had been demolished by the explosion.
Even while the passengers were crowding the starboard rail and
scrambling into the few boats left to us, the submarine commenced
shelling the ship.  I saw one shell burst in a group of women and
children, and then I turned my head and covered my eyes.

When I looked again to horror was added chagrin, for with the emerging
of the U-boat I had recognized her as a product of our own shipyard.  I
knew her to a rivet.  I had superintended her construction.  I had sat
in that very conning-tower and directed the efforts of the sweating
crew below when first her prow clove the sunny summer waters of the
Pacific; and now this creature of my brain and hand had turned
Frankenstein, bent upon pursuing me to my death.

A second shell exploded upon the deck.  One of the lifeboats,
frightfully overcrowded, swung at a dangerous angle from its davits. A
fragment of the shell shattered the bow tackle, and I saw the women and
children and the men vomited into the sea beneath, while the boat
dangled stern up for a moment from its single davit, and at last with
increasing momentum dived into the midst of the struggling victims
screaming upon the face of the waters.

Now I saw men spring to the rail and leap into the ocean.  The deck was
tilting to an impossible angle.  Nobs braced himself with all four feet
to keep from slipping into the scuppers and looked up into my face with
a questioning whine.  I stooped and stroked his head.

"Come on, boy!" I cried, and running to the side of the ship, dived
headforemost over the rail.  When I came up, the first thing I saw was
Nobs swimming about in a bewildered sort of way a few yards from me.
At sight of me his ears went flat, and his lips parted in a
characteristic grin.

The submarine was withdrawing toward the north, but all the time it was
shelling the open boats, three of them, loaded to the gunwales with
survivors.  Fortunately the small boats presented a rather poor target,
which, combined with the bad marksmanship of the Germans preserved
their occupants from harm; and after a few minutes a blotch of smoke
appeared upon the eastern horizon and the U-boat submerged and
disappeared.

All the time the lifeboats has been pulling away from the danger of the
sinking liner, and now, though I yelled at the top of my lungs, they
either did not hear my appeals for help or else did not dare return to
succor me.  Nobs and I had gained some little distance from the ship
when it rolled completely over and sank. We were caught in the suction
only enough to be drawn backward a few yards, neither of us being
carried beneath the surface. I glanced hurriedly about for something to
which to cling. My eyes were directed toward the point at which the
liner had disappeared when there came from the depths of the ocean the
muffled reverberation of an explosion, and almost simultaneously a
geyser of water in which were shattered lifeboats, human bodies, steam,
coal, oil, and the flotsam of a liner's deck leaped high above the
surface of the sea--a watery column momentarily marking the grave of
another ship in this greatest cemetery of the seas.

When the turbulent waters had somewhat subsided and the sea had ceased
to spew up wreckage, I ventured to swim back in search of something
substantial enough to support my weight and that of Nobs as well.  I
had gotten well over the area of the wreck when not a half-dozen yards
ahead of me a lifeboat shot bow foremost out of the ocean almost its
entire length to flop down upon its keel with a mighty splash.  It must
have been carried far below, held to its mother ship by a single rope
which finally parted to the enormous strain put upon it.  In no other
way can I account for its having leaped so far out of the water--a
beneficent circumstance to which I doubtless owe my life, and that of
another far dearer to me than my own.  I say beneficent circumstance
even in the face of the fact that a fate far more hideous confronts us
than that which we escaped that day; for because of that circumstance I
have met her whom otherwise I never should have known; I have met and
loved her.  At least I have had that great happiness in life; nor can
Caspak, with all her horrors, expunge that which has been.

So for the thousandth time I thank the strange fate which sent that
lifeboat hurtling upward from the green pit of destruction to which it
had been dragged--sent it far up above the surface, emptying its water
as it rose above the waves, and dropping it upon the surface of the
sea, buoyant and safe.

It did not take me long to clamber over its side and drag Nobs in to
comparative safety, and then I glanced around upon the scene of death
and desolation which surrounded us.  The sea was littered with wreckage
among which floated the pitiful forms of women and children, buoyed up
by their useless lifebelts. Some were torn and mangled; others lay
rolling quietly to the motion of the sea, their countenances composed
and peaceful; others were set in hideous lines of agony or horror.
Close to the boat's side floated the figure of a girl.  Her face was
turned upward, held above the surface by her life-belt, and was framed
in a floating mass of dark and waving hair.  She was very beautiful.  I
had never looked upon such perfect features, such a divine molding
which was at the same time human--intensely human.  It was a face
filled with character and strength and femininity--the face of one who
was created to love and to be loved.  The cheeks were flushed to the
hue of life and health and vitality, and yet she lay there upon the
bosom of the sea, dead.  I felt something rise in my throat as I looked
down upon that radiant vision, and I swore that I should live to avenge
her murder.

And then I let my eyes drop once more to the face upon the water, and
what I saw nearly tumbled me backward into the sea, for the eyes in the
dead face had opened; the lips had parted; and one hand was raised
toward me in a mute appeal for succor.  She lived! She was not dead! I
leaned over the boat's side and drew her quickly in to the comparative
safety which God had given me.  I removed her life-belt and my soggy
coat and made a pillow for her head.  I chafed her hands and arms and
feet.  I worked over her for an hour, and at last I was rewarded by a
deep sigh, and again those great eyes opened and looked into mine.

At that I was all embarrassment.  I have never been a ladies' man; at
Leland-Stanford I was the butt of the class because of my hopeless
imbecility in the presence of a pretty girl; but the men liked me,
nevertheless.  I was rubbing one of her hands when she opened her eyes,
and I dropped it as though it were a red-hot rivet. Those eyes took me
in slowly from head to foot; then they wandered slowly around the
horizon marked by the rising and falling gunwales of the lifeboat.
They looked at Nobs and softened, and then came back to me filled with
questioning.

"I--I--" I stammered, moving away and stumbling over the next thwart.
The vision smiled wanly.

"Aye-aye, sir!" she replied faintly, and again her lips drooped, and
her long lashes swept the firm, fair texture of her skin.

"I hope that you are feeling better," I finally managed to say.

"Do you know," she said after a moment of silence, "I have been awake
for a long time!  But I did not dare open my eyes. I thought I must be
dead, and I was afraid to look, for fear that I should see nothing but
blackness about me.  I am afraid to die!  Tell me what happened after
the ship went down. I remember all that happened before--oh, but I wish
that I might forget it!"  A sob broke her voice.  "The beasts!" she
went on after a moment.  "And to think that I was to have married one
of them--a lieutenant in the German navy."

Presently she resumed as though she had not ceased speaking. "I went
down and down and down.  I thought I should never cease to sink.  I
felt no particular distress until I suddenly started upward at
ever-increasing velocity; then my lungs seemed about to burst, and I
must have lost consciousness, for I remember nothing more until I
opened my eyes after listening to a torrent of invective against
Germany and Germans.  Tell me, please, all that happened after the ship
sank."

I told her, then, as well as I could, all that I had seen--the
submarine shelling the open boats and all the rest of it. She thought
it marvelous that we should have been spared in so providential a
manner, and I had a pretty speech upon my tongue's end, but lacked the
nerve to deliver it.  Nobs had come over and nosed his muzzle into her
lap, and she stroked his ugly face, and at last she leaned over and put
her cheek against his forehead. I have always admired Nobs; but this
was the first time that it had ever occurred to me that I might wish to
be Nobs.  I wondered how he would take it, for he is as unused to women
as I.  But he took to it as a duck takes to water.  What I lack of
being a ladies' man, Nobs certainly makes up for as a ladies' dog. The
old scalawag just closed his eyes and put on one of the softest
"sugar-wouldn't-melt-in-my-mouth" expressions you ever saw and stood
there taking it and asking for more.  It made me jealous.

"You seem fond of dogs," I said.

"I am fond of this dog," she replied.

Whether she meant anything personal in that reply I did not know; but I
took it as personal and it made me feel mighty good.

As we drifted about upon that vast expanse of loneliness it is not
strange that we should quickly become well acquainted. Constantly we
scanned the horizon for signs of smoke, venturing guesses as to our
chances of rescue; but darkness settled, and the black night enveloped
us without ever the sight of a speck upon the waters.

We were thirsty, hungry, uncomfortable, and cold.  Our wet garments had
dried but little and I knew that the girl must be in grave danger from
the exposure to a night of cold and wet upon the water in an open boat,
without sufficient clothing and no food.  I had managed to bail all the
water out of the boat with cupped hands, ending by mopping the balance
up with my handkerchief--a slow and back-breaking procedure; thus I had
made a comparatively dry place for the girl to lie down low in the
bottom of the boat, where the sides would protect her from the night
wind, and when at last she did so, almost overcome as she was by
weakness and fatigue, I threw my wet coat over her further to thwart
the chill.  But it was of no avail; as I sat watching her, the
moonlight marking out the graceful curves of her slender young body, I
saw her shiver.

"Isn't there something I can do?" I asked.  "You can't lie there
chilled through all night.  Can't you suggest something?"

She shook her head.  "We must grin and bear it," she replied after a
moment.

Nobbler came and lay down on the thwart beside me, his back against my
leg, and I sat staring in dumb misery at the girl, knowing in my heart
of hearts that she might die before morning came, for what with the
shock and exposure, she had already gone through enough to kill almost
any woman. And as I gazed down at her, so small and delicate and
helpless, there was born slowly within my breast a new emotion.  It had
never been there before; now it will never cease to be there.  It made
me almost frantic in my desire to find some way to keep warm and
cooling lifeblood in her veins.  I was cold myself, though I had almost
forgotten it until Nobbler moved and I felt a new sensation of cold
along my leg against which he had lain, and suddenly realized that in
that one spot I had been warm.  Like a great light came the
understanding of a means to warm the girl.  Immediately I knelt beside
her to put my scheme into practice when suddenly I was overwhelmed with
embarrassment.  Would she permit it, even if I could muster the courage
to suggest it?  Then I saw her frame convulse, shudderingly, her
muscles reacting to her rapidly lowering temperature, and casting
prudery to the winds, I threw myself down beside her and took her in my
arms, pressing her body close to mine.

She drew away suddenly, voicing a little cry of fright, and tried to
push me from her.

"Forgive me," I managed to stammer.  "It is the only way. You will die
of exposure if you are not warmed, and Nobs and I are the only means we
can command for furnishing warmth." And I held her tightly while I
called Nobs and bade him lie down at her back.  The girl didn't
struggle any more when she learned my purpose; but she gave two or
three little gasps, and then began to cry softly, burying her face on
my arm, and thus she fell asleep.



Chapter 2

Toward morning,  I must have dozed, though it seemed to me at the time
that I had lain awake for days, instead of hours.  When I finally
opened my eyes, it was daylight, and the girl's hair was in my face,
and she was breathing normally.  I thanked God for that.  She had
turned her head during the night so that as I opened my eyes I saw her
face not an inch from mine, my lips almost touching hers.

It was Nobs who finally awoke her.  He got up, stretched, turned around
a few times and lay down again, and the girl opened her eyes and looked
into mine.  Hers went very wide at first, and then slowly comprehension
came to her, and she smiled.

"You have been very good to me," she said, as I helped her to rise,
though if the truth were known I was more in need of assistance than
she; the circulation all along my left side seeming to be paralyzed
entirely.  "You have been very good to me." And that was the only
mention she ever made of it; yet I know that she was thankful and that
only reserve prevented her from referring to what, to say the least,
was an embarrassing situation, however unavoidable.

Shortly after daylight we saw smoke apparently coming straight toward
us, and after a time we made out the squat lines of a tug--one of those
fearless exponents of England's supremacy of the sea that tows sailing
ships into French and English ports. I stood up on a thwart and waved
my soggy coat above my head. Nobs stood upon another and barked.  The
girl sat at my feet straining her eyes toward the deck of the oncoming
boat. "They see us," she said at last.  "There is a man answering your
signal." She was right.  A lump came into my throat--for her sake
rather than for mine.  She was saved, and none too soon. She could not
have lived through another night upon the Channel; she might not have
lived through the coming day.

The tug came close beside us, and a man on deck threw us a rope.
Willing hands dragged us to the deck, Nobs scrambling nimbly aboard
without assistance.  The rough men were gentle as mothers with the
girl.  Plying us both with questions they hustled her to the captain's
cabin and me to the boiler-room.  They told the girl to take off her
wet clothes and throw them outside the door that they might be dried,
and then to slip into the captain's bunk and get warm.  They didn't
have to tell me to strip after I once got into the warmth of the
boiler-room.  In a jiffy, my clothes hung about where they might dry
most quickly, and I myself was absorbing, through every pore, the
welcome heat of the stifling compartment.  They brought us hot soup and
coffee, and then those who were not on duty sat around and helped me
damn the Kaiser and his brood.

As soon as our clothes were dry, they bade us don them, as the chances
were always more than fair in those waters that we should run into
trouble with the enemy, as I was only too well aware. What with the
warmth and the feeling of safety for the girl, and the knowledge that a
little rest and food would quickly overcome the effects of her
experiences of the past dismal hours, I was feeling more content than I
had experienced since those three whistle-blasts had shattered the
peace of my world the previous afternoon.

But peace upon the Channel has been but a transitory thing since
August, 1914.  It proved itself such that morning, for I had scarce
gotten into my dry clothes and taken the girl's apparel to the
captain's cabin when an order was shouted down into the engine-room for
full speed ahead, and an instant later I heard the dull boom of a gun.
In a moment I was up on deck to see an enemy submarine about two
hundred yards off our port bow.  She had signaled us to stop, and our
skipper had ignored the order; but now she had her gun trained on us,
and the second shot grazed the cabin, warning the belligerent
tug-captain that it was time to obey.  Once again an order went down to
the engine-room, and the tug reduced speed.  The U-boat ceased firing
and ordered the tug to come about and approach.  Our momentum had
carried us a little beyond the enemy craft, but we were turning now on
the arc of a circle that would bring us alongside her.  As I stood
watching the maneuver and wondering what was to become of us, I felt
something touch my elbow and turned to see the girl standing at my
side.  She looked up into my face with a rueful expression. "They seem
bent on our destruction," she said, "and it looks like the same boat
that sunk us yesterday."

"It is," I replied.  "I know her well.  I helped design her and took
her out on her first run."

The girl drew back from me with a little exclamation of surprise and
disappointment.  "I thought you were an American," she said. "I had no
idea you were a--a--"

"Nor am I," I replied.  "Americans have been building submarines for
all nations for many years.  I wish, though, that we had gone bankrupt,
my father and I, before ever we turned out that Frankenstein of a
thing."

We were approaching the U-boat at half speed now, and I could almost
distinguish the features of the men upon her deck. A sailor stepped to
my side and slipped something hard and cold into my hand.  I did not
have to look at it to know that it was a heavy pistol.  "Tyke 'er an'
use 'er," was all he said.

Our bow was pointed straight toward the U-boat now as I heard word
passed to the engine for full speed ahead.  I instantly grasped the
brazen effrontery of the plucky English skipper--he was going to ram
five hundreds tons of U-boat in the face of her trained gun.  I could
scarce repress a cheer.  At first the boches didn't seem to grasp his
intention.  Evidently they thought they were witnessing an exhibition
of poor seamanship, and they yelled their warnings to the tug to reduce
speed and throw the helm hard to port.

We were within fifty feet of them when they awakened to the intentional
menace of our maneuver.  Their gun crew was off its guard; but they
sprang to their piece now and sent a futile shell above our heads.
Nobs leaped about and barked furiously.  "Let 'em have it!" commanded
the tug-captain, and instantly revolvers and rifles poured bullets upon
the deck of the submersible.  Two of the gun-crew went down; the other
trained their piece at the water-line of the oncoming tug.  The balance
of those on deck replied to our small-arms fire, directing their
efforts toward the man at our wheel.

I hastily pushed the girl down the companionway leading to the
engine-room, and then I raised my pistol and fired my first shot at a
boche.  What happened in the next few seconds happened so quickly that
details are rather blurred in my memory.  I saw the helmsman lunge
forward upon the wheel, pulling the helm around so that the tug sheered
off quickly from her course, and I recall realizing that all our
efforts were to be in vain, because of all the men aboard, Fate had
decreed that this one should fall first to an enemy bullet.  I saw the
depleted gun-crew on the submarine fire their piece and I felt the
shock of impact and heard the loud explosion as the shell struck and
exploded in our bows.

I saw and realized these things even as I was leaping into the
pilot-house and grasping the wheel, standing astride the dead body of
the helmsman.  With all my strength I threw the helm to starboard; but
it was too late to effect the purpose of our skipper.  The best I did
was to scrape alongside the sub. I heard someone shriek an order into
the engine-room; the boat shuddered and trembled to the sudden
reversing of the engines, and our speed quickly lessened.  Then I saw
what that madman of a skipper planned since his first scheme had gone
wrong.

With a loud-yelled command, he leaped to the slippery deck of the
submersible, and at his heels came his hardy crew.  I sprang from the
pilot-house and followed, not to be left out in the cold when it came
to strafing the boches.  From the engine room companionway came the
engineer and stockers, and together we leaped after the balance of the
crew and into the hand-to-hand fight that was covering the wet deck
with red blood.  Beside me came Nobs, silent now, and grim.  Germans
were emerging from the open hatch to take part in the battle on deck.
At first the pistols cracked amidst the cursing of the men and the loud
commands of the commander and his junior; but presently we were too
indiscriminately mixed to make it safe to use our firearms, and the
battle resolved itself into a hand-to-hand struggle for possession of
the deck.

The sole aim of each of us was to hurl one of the opposing force into
the sea.  I shall never forget the hideous expression upon the face of
the great Prussian with whom chance confronted me. He lowered his head
and rushed at me, bellowing like a bull. With a quick side-step and
ducking low beneath his outstretched arms, I eluded him; and as he
turned to come back at me, I landed a blow upon his chin which sent him
spinning toward the edge of the deck.  I saw his wild endeavors to
regain his equilibrium; I saw him reel drunkenly for an instant upon
the brink of eternity and then, with a loud scream, slip into the sea.
At the same instant a pair of giant arms encircled me from behind and
lifted me entirely off my feet.  Kick and squirm as I would, I could
neither turn toward my antagonist nor free myself from his maniacal
grasp.  Relentlessly he was rushing me toward the side of the vessel
and death.  There was none to stay him, for each of my companions was
more than occupied by from one to three of the enemy.  For an instant I
was fearful for myself, and then I saw that which filled me with a far
greater terror for another.

My boche was bearing me toward the side of the submarine against which
the tug was still pounding.  That I should be ground to death between
the two was lost upon me as I saw the girl standing alone upon the
tug's deck, as I saw the stern high in air and the bow rapidly settling
for the final dive, as I saw death from which I could not save her
clutching at the skirts of the woman I now knew all too well that I
loved.

I had perhaps the fraction of a second longer to live when I heard an
angry growl behind us mingle with a cry of pain and rage from the giant
who carried me.  Instantly he went backward to the deck, and as he did
so he threw his arms outwards to save himself, freeing me.  I fell
heavily upon him, but was upon my feet in the instant.  As I arose, I
cast a single glance at my opponent. Never again would he menace me or
another, for Nob's great jaws had closed upon his throat.  Then I
sprang toward the edge of the deck closest to the girl upon the sinking
tug.

"Jump!" I cried.  "Jump!"  And I held out my arms to her. Instantly as
though with implicit confidence in my ability to save her, she leaped
over the side of the tug onto the sloping, slippery side of the U-boat.
I reached far over to seize her hand.  At the same instant the tug
pointed its stern straight toward the sky and plunged out of sight.  My
hand missed the girl's by a fraction of an inch, and I saw her slip
into the sea; but scarce had she touched the water when I was in after
her.

The sinking tug drew us far below the surface; but I had seized her the
moment I struck the water, and so we went down together, and together
we came up--a few yards from the U-boat.  The first thing I heard was
Nobs barking furiously; evidently he had missed me and was searching.
A single glance at the vessel's deck assured me that the battle was
over and that we had been victorious, for I saw our survivors holding a
handful of the enemy at pistol points while one by one the rest of the
crew was coming out of the craft's interior and lining up on deck with
the other prisoners.

As I swam toward the submarine with the girl, Nobs' persistent barking
attracted the attention of some of the tug's crew, so that as soon as
we reached the side there were hands to help us aboard.  I asked the
girl if she was hurt, but she assured me that she was none the worse
for this second wetting; nor did she seem to suffer any from shock.  I
was to learn for myself that this slender and seemingly delicate
creature possessed the heart and courage of a warrior.

As we joined our own party, I found the tug's mate checking up our
survivors.  There were ten of us left, not including the girl. Our
brave skipper was missing, as were eight others.  There had been
nineteen of us in the attacking party and we had accounted in one way
and another during the battle for sixteen Germans and had taken nine
prisoners, including the commander.  His lieutenant had been killed.

"Not a bad day's work," said Bradley, the mate, when he had completed
his roll.  "Only losing the skipper," he added, "was the worst.  He was
a fine man, a fine man."

Olson--who in spite of his name was Irish, and in spite of his not
being Scotch had been the tug's engineer--was standing with Bradley and
me.  "Yis," he agreed, "it's a day's wor-rk we're after doin', but what
are we goin' to be doin' wid it now we got it?"

"We'll run her into the nearest English port," said Bradley, "and then
we'll all go ashore and get our V. C.'s," he concluded, laughing.

"How you goin' to run her?" queried Olson.  "You can't trust these
Dutchmen."

Bradley scratched his head.  "I guess you're right," he admitted. "And
I don't know the first thing about a sub."

"I do," I assured him.  "I know more about this particular sub than the
officer who commanded her."

Both men looked at me in astonishment, and then I had to explain all
over again as I had explained to the girl.  Bradley and Olson were
delighted.  Immediately I was put in command, and the first thing I did
was to go below with Olson and inspect the craft thoroughly for hidden
boches and damaged machinery.  There were no Germans below, and
everything was intact and in ship-shape working order.  I then ordered
all hands below except one man who was to act as lookout.  Questioning
the Germans, I found that all except the commander were willing to
resume their posts and aid in bringing the vessel into an English port.
I believe that they were relieved at the prospect of being detained at
a comfortable English prison-camp for the duration of the war after the
perils and privations through which they had passed.  The officer,
however, assured me that he would never be a party to the capture of
his vessel.

There was, therefore, nothing to do but put the man in irons. As we
were preparing to put this decision into force, the girl descended from
the deck.  It was the first time that she or the German officer had
seen each other's faces since we had boarded the U-boat.  I was
assisting the girl down the ladder and still retained a hold upon her
arm--possibly after such support was no longer necessary--when she
turned and looked squarely into the face of the German.  Each voiced a
sudden exclamation of surprise and dismay.

"Lys!" he cried, and took a step toward her.

The girl's eyes went wide, and slowly filled with a great horror, as
she shrank back.  Then her slender figure stiffened to the erectness of
a soldier, and with chin in air and without a word she turned her back
upon the officer.

"Take him away," I directed the two men who guarded him, "and put him
in irons."

When he had gone, the girl raised her eyes to mine.  "He is the German
of whom I spoke," she said.  "He is Baron von Schoenvorts."

I merely inclined my head.  She had loved him!  I wondered if in her
heart of hearts she did not love him yet.  Immediately I became
insanely jealous.  I hated Baron Friedrich von Schoenvorts with such
utter intensity that the emotion thrilled me with a species of
exaltation.

But I didn't have much chance to enjoy my hatred then, for almost
immediately the lookout poked his face over the hatchway and bawled
down that there was smoke on the horizon, dead ahead. Immediately I
went on deck to investigate, and Bradley came with me.

"If she's friendly," he said, "we'll speak her.  If she's not, we'll
sink her--eh, captain?"

"Yes, lieutenant," I replied, and it was his turn to smile.

We hoisted the Union Jack and remained on deck, asking Bradley to go
below and assign to each member of the crew his duty, placing one
Englishman with a pistol beside each German.

"Half speed ahead," I commanded.

More rapidly now we closed the distance between ourselves and the
stranger, until I could plainly see the red ensign of the British
merchant marine.  My heart swelled with pride at the thought that
presently admiring British tars would be congratulating us upon our
notable capture; and just about then the merchant steamer must have
sighted us, for she veered suddenly toward the north, and a moment
later dense volumes of smoke issued from her funnels. Then, steering a
zigzag course, she fled from us as though we had been the bubonic
plague.  I altered the course of the submarine and set off in chase;
but the steamer was faster than we, and soon left us hopelessly astern.

With a rueful smile, I directed that our original course be resumed,
and once again we set off toward merry England. That was three months
ago, and we haven't arrived yet; nor is there any likelihood that we
ever shall.

The steamer we had just sighted must have wirelessed a warning, for it
wasn't half an hour before we saw more smoke on the horizon, and this
time the vessel flew the white ensign of the Royal Navy and carried
guns.  She didn't veer to the north or anywhere else, but bore down on
us rapidly.  I was just preparing to signal her, when a flame flashed
from her bows, and an instant later the water in front of us was thrown
high by the explosion of a shell.

Bradley had come on deck and was standing beside me.  "About one more
of those, and she'll have our range," he said.  "She doesn't seem to
take much stock in our Union Jack."

A second shell passed over us, and then I gave the command to change
our direction, at the same time directing Bradley to go below and give
the order to submerge.  I passed Nobs down to him, and following, saw
to the closing and fastening of the hatch.

It seemed to me that the diving-tanks never had filled so slowly. We
heard a loud explosion apparently directly above us; the craft trembled
to the shock which threw us all to the deck.  I expected momentarily to
feel the deluge of inrushing water, but none came. Instead we continued
to submerge until the manometer registered forty feet and then I knew
that we were safe.  Safe!  I almost smiled. I had relieved Olson, who
had remained in the tower at my direction, having been a member of one
of the early British submarine crews, and therefore having some
knowledge of the business.  Bradley was at my side.  He looked at me
quizzically.

"What the devil are we to do?" he asked.  "The merchantman will flee
us; the war-vessel will destroy us; neither will believe our colors or
give us a chance to explain.  We will meet even a worse reception if we
go nosing around a British port--mines, nets and all of it.  We can't
do it."

"Let's try it again when this fellow has lost the scent," I urged.
"There must come a ship that will believe us."

And try it again we did, only to be almost rammed by a huge freighter.
Later we were fired upon by a destroyer, and two merchantmen turned and
fled at our approach.  For two days we cruised up and down the Channel
trying to tell some one, who would listen, that we were friends; but no
one would listen.  After our encounter with the first warship I had
given instructions that a wireless message be sent out explaining our
predicament; but to my chagrin I discovered that both sending and
receiving instruments had disappeared.

"There is only one place you can go," von Schoenvorts sent word to me,
"and that is Kiel.  You can't land anywhere else in these waters.  If
you wish, I will take you there, and I can promise that you will be
treated well."

"There is another place we can go," I sent back my reply, "and we will
before we'll go to Germany.  That place is hell."



Chapter 3

Those were anxious days, during which I had but little opportunity to
associate with Lys.  I had given her the commander's room, Bradley and
I taking that of the deck-officer, while Olson and two of our best men
occupied the room ordinarily allotted to petty officers.  I made Nobs'
bed down in Lys' room, for I knew she would feel less alone.

Nothing of much moment occurred for a while after we left British
waters behind us.  We ran steadily along upon the surface, making good
time.  The first two boats we sighted made off as fast as they could
go; and the third, a huge freighter, fired on us, forcing us to
submerge.  It was after this that our troubles commenced. One of the
Diesel engines broke down in the morning, and while we were working on
it, the forward port diving-tank commenced to fill.  I was on deck at
the time and noted the gradual list. Guessing at once what was
happening, I leaped for the hatch and slamming it closed above my head,
dropped to the centrale.  By this time the craft was going down by the
head with a most unpleasant list to port, and I didn't wait to transmit
orders to some one else but ran as fast as I could for the valve that
let the sea into the forward port diving-tank.  It was wide open.  To
close it and to have the pump started that would empty it were the work
of but a minute; but we had had a close call.

I knew that the valve had never opened itself.  Some one had opened
it--some one who was willing to die himself if he might at the same
time encompass the death of all of us.

After that I kept a guard pacing the length of the narrow craft. We
worked upon the engine all that day and night and half the following
day.  Most of the time we drifted idly upon the surface, but toward
noon we sighted smoke due west, and having found that only enemies
inhabited the world for us, I ordered that the other engine be started
so that we could move out of the path of the oncoming steamer.  The
moment the engine started to turn, however, there was a grinding sound
of tortured steel, and when it had been stopped, we found that some one
had placed a cold-chisel in one of the gears.

It was another two days before we were ready to limp along, half
repaired.  The night before the repairs were completed, the sentry came
to my room and awoke me.  He was rather an intelligent fellow of the
English middle class, in whom I had much confidence.

"Well, Wilson," I asked.  "What's the matter now?"

He raised his finger to his lips and came closer to me.  "I think I've
found out who's doin' the mischief," he whispered, and nodded his head
toward the girl's room.  "I seen her sneakin' from the crew's room just
now," he went on.  "She'd been in gassin' wit' the boche commander.
Benson seen her in there las' night, too, but he never said nothin'
till I goes on watch tonight. Benson's sorter slow in the head, an' he
never puts two an' two together till some one else has made four out of
it."

If the man had come in and struck me suddenly in the face, I could have
been no more surprised.

"Say nothing of this to anyone," I ordered.  "Keep your eyes and ears
open and report every suspicious thing you see or hear."

The man saluted and left me; but for an hour or more I tossed,
restless, upon my hard bunk in an agony of jealousy and fear. Finally I
fell into a troubled sleep.  It was daylight when I awoke. We were
steaming along slowly upon the surface, my orders having been to
proceed at half speed until we could take an observation and determine
our position.  The sky had been overcast all the previous day and all
night; but as I stepped into the centrale that morning I was delighted
to see that the sun was again shining. The spirits of the men seemed
improved; everything seemed propitious. I forgot at once the cruel
misgivings of the past night as I set to work to take my observations.

What a blow awaited me!  The sextant and chronometer had both been
broken beyond repair,  and they had been broken just this very night.
They had been broken upon the night that Lys had been seen talking with
von Schoenvorts.  I think that it was this last thought which hurt me
the worst.  I could look the other disaster in the face with
equanimity; but the bald fact that Lys might be a traitor appalled me.

I called Bradley and Olson on deck and told them what had happened, but
for the life of me I couldn't bring myself to repeat what Wilson had
reported to me the previous night. In fact, as I had given the matter
thought, it seemed incredible that the girl could have passed through
my room, in which Bradley and I slept, and then carried on a
conversation in the crew's room, in which Von Schoenvorts was kept,
without having been seen by more than a single man.

Bradley shook his head.  "I can't make it out," he said.  "One of those
boches must be pretty clever to come it over us all like this; but they
haven't harmed us as much as they think; there are still the extra
instruments."

It was my turn now to shake a doleful head.  "There are no extra
instruments," I told them.  "They too have disappeared as did the
wireless apparatus."

Both men looked at me in amazement.  "We still have the compass and the
sun," said Olson.  "They may be after getting the compass some night;
but they's too many of us around in the daytime fer 'em to get the sun."

It was then that one of the men stuck his head up through the hatchway
and seeing me, asked permission to come on deck and get a breath of
fresh air.  I recognized him as Benson, the man who, Wilson had said,
reported having seen Lys with von Schoenvorts two nights before.  I
motioned him on deck and then called him to one side, asking if he had
seen anything out of the way or unusual during his trick on watch the
night before.  The fellow scratched his head a moment and said, "No,"
and then as though it was an afterthought, he told me that he had seen
the girl in the crew's room about midnight talking with the German
commander, but as there hadn't seemed to him to be any harm in that, he
hadn't said anything about it.  Telling him never to fail to report to
me anything in the slightest out of the ordinary routine of the ship, I
dismissed him.

Several of the other men now asked permission to come on deck, and soon
all but those actually engaged in some necessary duty were standing
around smoking and talking, all in the best of spirits. I took
advantage of the absence of the men upon the deck to go below for my
breakfast, which the cook was already preparing upon the electric
stove.  Lys, followed by Nobs, appeared as I entered the centrale.  She
met me with a pleasant "Good morning!" which I am afraid I replied to
in a tone that was rather constrained and surly.

"Will you breakfast with me?" I suddenly asked the girl, determined to
commence a probe of my own along the lines which duty demanded.

She nodded a sweet acceptance of my invitation, and together we sat
down at the little table of the officers' mess.

"You slept well last night?" I asked.

"All night," she replied.  "I am a splendid sleeper."

Her manner was so straightforward and honest that I could not bring
myself to believe in her duplicity; yet--Thinking to surprise her into
a betrayal of her guilt, I blurted out:  "The chronometer and sextant
were both destroyed last night; there is a traitor among us."  But she
never turned a hair by way of evidencing guilty knowledge of the
catastrophe.

"Who could it have been?" she cried.  "The Germans would be crazy to do
it, for their lives are as much at stake as ours."

"Men are often glad to die for an ideal--an ideal of patriotism,
perhaps," I replied; "and a willingness to martyr themselves includes a
willingness to sacrifice others, even those who love them.  Women are
much the same, except that they will go even further than most
men--they will sacrifice everything, even honor, for love."

I watched her face carefully as I spoke, and I thought that I detected
a very faint flush mounting her cheek.  Seeing an opening and an
advantage, I sought to follow it up.

"Take von Schoenvorts, for instance," I continued: "he would doubtless
be glad to die and take us all with him, could he prevent in no other
way the falling of his vessel into enemy hands. He would sacrifice
anyone, even you; and if you still love him, you might be his ready
tool.  Do you understand me?"

She looked at me in wide-eyed consternation for a moment, and then she
went very white and rose from her seat.  "I do," she replied, and
turning her back upon me, she walked quickly toward her room.  I
started to follow, for even believing what I did, I was sorry that I
had hurt her.  I reached the door to the crew's room just behind her
and in time to see von Schoenvorts lean forward and whisper something
to her as she passed; but she must have guessed that she might be
watched, for she passed on.

That afternoon it clouded over; the wind mounted to a gale, and the sea
rose until the craft was wallowing and rolling frightfully. Nearly
everyone aboard was sick; the air became foul and oppressive. For
twenty-four hours I did not leave my post in the conning tower, as both
Olson and Bradley were sick.  Finally I found that I must get a little
rest, and so I looked about for some one to relieve me. Benson
volunteered.  He had not been sick, and assured me that he was a former
R.N. man and had been detailed for submarine duty for over two years.
I was glad that it was he, for I had considerable confidence in his
loyalty, and so it was with a feeling of security that I went below and
lay down.

I slept twelve hours straight, and when I awoke and discovered what I
had done, I lost no time in getting to the conning tower. There sat
Benson as wide awake as could be, and the compass showed that we were
heading straight into the west.  The storm was still raging; nor did it
abate its fury until the fourth day. We were all pretty well done up
and looked forward to the time when we could go on deck and fill our
lungs with fresh air. During the whole four days I had not seen the
girl, as she evidently kept closely to her room; and during this time
no untoward incident had occurred aboard the boat--a fact which seemed
to strengthen the web of circumstantial evidence about her.

For six more days after the storm lessened we still had fairly rough
weather; nor did the sun once show himself during all that time.  For
the season--it was now the middle of June--the storm was unusual; but
being from southern California, I was accustomed to unusual weather.
In fact, I have discovered that the world over, unusual weather
prevails at all times of the year.

We kept steadily to our westward course, and as the U-33 was one of the
fastest submersibles we had ever turned out, I knew that we must be
pretty close to the North American coast.  What puzzled me most was the
fact that for six days we had not sighted a single ship.  It seemed
remarkable that we could cross the Atlantic almost to the coast of the
American continent without glimpsing smoke or sail, and at last I came
to the conclusion that we were way off our course, but whether to the
north or to the south of it I could not determine.

On the seventh day the sea lay comparatively calm at early dawn. There
was a slight haze upon the ocean which had cut off our view of the
stars; but conditions all pointed toward a clear morrow, and I was on
deck anxiously awaiting the rising of the sun.  My eyes were glued upon
the impenetrable mist astern, for there in the east I should see the
first glow of the rising sun that would assure me we were still upon
the right course.  Gradually the heavens lightened; but astern I could
see no intenser glow that would indicate the rising sun behind the
mist.  Bradley was standing at my side.  Presently he touched my arm.

"Look, captain," he said, and pointed south.

I looked and gasped, for there directly to port I saw outlined through
the haze the red top of the rising sun.  Hurrying to the tower, I
looked at the compass.  It showed that we were holding steadily upon
our westward course.  Either the sun was rising in the south, or the
compass had been tampered with.  The conclusion was obvious.

I went back to Bradley and told him what I had discovered. "And," I
concluded, "we can't make another five hundred knots without oil; our
provisions are running low and so is our water. God only knows how far
south we have run."

"There is nothing to do," he replied, "other than to alter our course
once more toward the west; we must raise land soon or we shall all be
lost."

I told him to do so; and then I set to work improvising a crude sextant
with which we finally took our bearings in a rough and most
unsatisfactory manner; for when the work was done, we did not know how
far from the truth the result might be.  It showed us to be about 20'
north and 30' west--nearly twenty-five hundred miles off our course.
In short, if our reading was anywhere near correct, we must have been
traveling due south for six days.  Bradley now relieved Benson, for we
had arranged our shifts so that the latter and Olson now divided the
nights, while Bradley and I alternated with one another during the days.

I questioned both Olson and Benson closely in the matter of the
compass; but each stoutly maintained that no one had tampered with it
during his tour of duty.  Benson gave me a knowing smile, as much as to
say:  "Well, you and I know who did this."  Yet I could not believe
that it was the girl.

We kept to our westerly course for several hours when the lookout's cry
announced a sail.  I ordered the U-33's course altered, and we bore
down upon the stranger, for I had come to a decision which was the
result of necessity.  We could not lie there in the middle of the
Atlantic and starve to death if there was any way out of it.  The
sailing ship saw us while we were still a long way off, as was
evidenced by her efforts to escape. There was scarcely any wind,
however, and her case was hopeless; so when we drew near and signaled
her to stop, she came into the wind and lay there with her sails
flapping idly.  We moved in quite close to her.  She was the Balmen of
Halmstad, Sweden, with a general cargo from Brazil for Spain.

I explained our circumstances to her skipper and asked for food, water
and oil; but when he found that we were not German, he became very
angry and abusive and started to draw away from us; but I was in no
mood for any such business.  Turning toward Bradley, who was in the
conning-tower, I snapped out: "Gun-service on deck!  To the diving
stations!"  We had no opportunity for drill; but every man had been
posted as to his duties, and the German members of the crew understood
that it was obedience or death for them, as each was accompanied by a
man with a pistol.  Most of them, though, were only too glad to obey me.

Bradley passed the order down into the ship and a moment later the
gun-crew clambered up the narrow ladder and at my direction trained
their piece upon the slow-moving Swede.  "Fire a shot across her bow,"
I instructed the gun-captain.

Accept it from me, it didn't take that Swede long to see the error of
his way and get the red and white pennant signifying "I understand" to
the masthead.  Once again the sails flapped idly, and then I ordered
him to lower a boat and come after me. With Olson and a couple of the
Englishmen I boarded the ship, and from her cargo selected what we
needed--oil, provisions and water.  I gave the master of the Balmen a
receipt for what we took, together with an affidavit signed by Bradley,
Olson, and myself, stating briefly how we had come into possession of
the U-33 and the urgency of our need for what we took.  We addressed
both to any British agent with the request that the owners of the
Balmen be reimbursed; but whether or not they were, I do not know.[1]

With water, food, and oil aboard, we felt that we had obtained a new
lease of life.  Now, too, we knew definitely where we were, and I
determined to make for Georgetown, British Guiana--but I was destined
to again suffer bitter disappointment.

Six of us of the loyal crew had come on deck either to serve the gun or
board the Swede during our set-to with her; and now, one by one, we
descended the ladder into the centrale.  I was the last to come, and
when I reached the bottom, I found myself looking into the muzzle of a
pistol in the hands of Baron Friedrich von Schoenvorts--I saw all my
men lined up at one side with the remaining eight Germans standing
guard over them.


I couldn't imagine how it had happened; but it had.  Later I learned
that they had first overpowered Benson, who was asleep in his bunk, and
taken his pistol from him, and then had found it an easy matter to
disarm the cook and the remaining two Englishmen below.  After that it
had been comparatively simple to stand at the foot of the ladder and
arrest each individual as he descended.

The first thing von Schoenvorts did was to send for me and announce
that as a pirate I was to be shot early the next morning. Then he
explained that the U-33 would cruise in these waters for a time,
sinking neutral and enemy shipping indiscriminately, and looking for
one of the German raiders that was supposed to be in these parts.

He didn't shoot me the next morning as he had promised, and it has
never been clear to me why he postponed the execution of my sentence.
Instead he kept me ironed just as he had been; then he kicked Bradley
out of my room and took it all to himself.

We cruised for a long time, sinking many vessels, all but one by
gunfire, but we did not come across a German raider.  I was surprised
to note that von Schoenvorts often permitted Benson to take command;
but I reconciled this by the fact that Benson appeared to know more of
the duties of a submarine commander than did any of the Stupid Germans.

Once or twice Lys passed me; but for the most part she kept to her
room.  The first time she hesitated as though she wished to speak to
me; but I did not raise my head, and finally she passed on. Then one
day came the word that we were about to round the Horn and that von
Schoenvorts had taken it into his fool head to cruise up along the
Pacific coast of North America and prey upon all sorts and conditions
of merchantmen.

"I'll put the fear of God and the Kaiser into them," he said.

The very first day we entered the South Pacific we had an adventure. It
turned out to be quite the most exciting adventure I had ever
encountered.  It fell about this way.  About eight bells of the
forenoon watch I heard a hail from the deck, and presently the
footsteps of the entire ship's company, from the amount of noise I
heard at the ladder.  Some one yelled back to those who had not yet
reached the level of the deck:  "It's the raider, the German raider
Geier!"

I saw that we had reached the end of our rope.  Below all was
quiet--not a man remained.  A door opened at the end of the narrow
hull, and presently Nobs came trotting up to me.  He licked my face and
rolled over on his back, reaching for me with his big, awkward paws.
Then other footsteps sounded, approaching me. I knew whose they were,
and I looked straight down at the flooring. The girl was coming almost
at a run--she was at my side immediately. "Here!" she cried.  "Quick!"
And she slipped something into my hand. It was a key--the key to my
irons.  At my side she also laid a pistol, and then she went on into
the centrale.  As she passed me, I saw that she carried another pistol
for herself.  It did not take me long to liberate myself, and then I
was at her side. "How can I thank you?" I started; but she shut me up
with a word.

"Do not thank me," she said coldly.  "I do not care to hear your thanks
or any other expression from you.  Do not stand there looking at me.  I
have given you a chance to do something--now do it!" The last was a
peremptory command that made me jump.

Glancing up, I saw that the tower was empty, and I lost no time in
clambering up, looking about me.  About a hundred yards off lay a
small, swift cruiser-raider, and above her floated the German
man-of-war's flag.  A boat had just been lowered, and I could see it
moving toward us filled with officers and men. The cruiser lay dead
ahead.  "My," I thought, "what a wonderful targ--" I stopped even
thinking, so surprised and shocked was I by the boldness of my imagery.
The girl was just below me.  I looked down on her wistfully.  Could I
trust her?  Why had she released me at this moment?  I must!  I must!
There was no other way. I dropped back below.  "Ask Olson to step down
here, please," I requested; "and don't let anyone see you ask him."

She looked at me with a puzzled expression on her face for the barest
fraction of a second, and then she turned and went up the ladder.  A
moment later Olson returned, and the girl followed him.  "Quick!" I
whispered to the big Irishman, and made for the bow compartment where
the torpedo-tubes are built into the boat; here, too, were the
torpedoes.  The girl accompanied us, and when she saw the thing I had
in mind, she stepped forward and lent a hand to the swinging of the
great cylinder of death and destruction into the mouth of its tube.
With oil and main strength we shoved the torpedo home and shut the
tube; then I ran back to the conning-tower, praying in my heart of
hearts that the U-33 had not swung her bow away from the prey.  No,
thank God!

Never could aim have been truer.  I signaled back to Olson: "Let 'er
go!"  The U-33 trembled from stem to stern as the torpedo shot from its
tube.  I saw the white wake leap from her bow straight toward the enemy
cruiser.  A chorus of hoarse yells arose from the deck of our own
craft:  I saw the officers stand suddenly erect in the boat that was
approaching us, and I heard loud cries and curses from the raider.
Then I turned my attention to my own business.  Most of the men on the
submarine's deck were standing in paralyzed fascination, staring at the
torpedo. Bradley happened to be looking toward the conning-tower and
saw me.  I sprang on deck and ran toward him.  "Quick!" I whispered.
"While they are stunned, we must overcome them."

A German was standing near Bradley--just in front of him. The
Englishman struck the fellow a frantic blow upon the neck and at the
same time snatched his pistol from its holster. Von Schoenvorts had
recovered from his first surprise quickly and had turned toward the
main hatch to investigate.  I covered him with my revolver, and at the
same instant the torpedo struck the raider, the terrific explosion
drowning the German's command to his men.

Bradley was now running from one to another of our men, and though some
of the Germans saw and heard him, they seemed too stunned for action.

Olson was below, so that there were only nine of us against eight
Germans, for the man Bradley had struck still lay upon the deck. Only
two of us were armed; but the heart seemed to have gone out of the
boches, and they put up but half-hearted resistance. Von Schoenvorts
was the worst--he was fairly frenzied with rage and chagrin, and he
came charging for me like a mad bull, and as he came he discharged his
pistol.  If he'd stopped long enough to take aim, he might have gotten
me; but his pace made him wild, so that not a shot touched me, and then
we clinched and went to the deck.  This left two pistols, which two of
my own men were quick to appropriate.  The Baron was no match for me in
a hand-to-hand encounter, and I soon had him pinned to the deck and the
life almost choked out of him.

A half-hour later things had quieted down, and all was much the same as
before the prisoners had revolted--only we kept a much closer watch on
von Schoenvorts.  The Geier had sunk while we were still battling upon
our deck, and afterward we had drawn away toward the north, leaving the
survivors to the attention of the single boat which had been making its
way toward us when Olson launched the torpedo.  I suppose the poor
devils never reached land, and if they did, they most probably perished
on that cold and unhospitable shore; but I couldn't permit them aboard
the U-33.  We had all the Germans we could take care of.

That evening the girl asked permission to go on deck.  She said that
she felt the effects of long confinement below, and I readily granted
her request.  I could not understand her, and I craved an opportunity
to talk with her again in an effort to fathom her and her intentions,
and so I made it a point to follow her up the ladder.  It was a clear,
cold, beautiful night. The sea was calm except for the white water at
our bows and the two long radiating swells running far off into the
distance upon either hand astern, forming a great V which our
propellers filled with choppy waves.  Benson was in the tower, we were
bound for San Diego and all looked well.

Lys stood with a heavy blanket wrapped around her slender figure, and
as I approached her, she half turned toward me to see who it was. When
she recognized me, she immediately turned away.

"I want to thank you," I said, "for your bravery and loyalty--you were
magnificent.  I am sorry that you had reason before to think that I
doubted you."

"You did doubt me," she replied in a level voice.  "You practically
accused me of aiding Baron von Schoenvorts.  I can never forgive you."

There was a great deal of finality in both her words and tone.

"I could not believe it," I said; "and yet two of my men reported
having seen you in conversation with von Schoenvorts late at night upon
two separate occasions--after each of which some great damage was found
done us in the morning.  I didn't want to doubt you; but I carried all
the responsibility of the lives of these men, of the safety of the
ship, of your life and mine.  I had to watch you, and I had to put you
on your guard against a repetition of your madness."

She was looking at me now with those great eyes of hers, very wide and
round.

"Who told you that I spoke with Baron von Schoenvorts at night, or any
other time?" she asked.

"I cannot tell you, Lys," I replied, "but it came to me from two
different sources."

"Then two men have lied," she asserted without heat.  "I have not
spoken to Baron von Schoenvorts other than in your presence when first
we came aboard the U-33.  And please, when you address me, remember
that to others than my intimates I am Miss La Rue."

Did you ever get slapped in the face when you least expected it? No?
Well, then you do not know how I felt at that moment. I could feel the
hot, red flush surging up my neck, across my cheeks, over my ears,
clear to my scalp.  And it made me love her all the more; it made me
swear inwardly a thousand solemn oaths that I would win her.


[1]  Late in July, 1916, an item in the shipping news mentioned a
Swedish sailing vessel, Balmen, Rio de Janeiro to Barcelona, sunk by a
German raider sometime in June.  A single survivor in an open boat was
picked up off the Cape Verde Islands, in a dying condition. He expired
without giving any details.



Chapter 4

For several days things went along in about the same course. I took our
position every morning with my crude sextant; but the results were
always most unsatisfactory.  They always showed a considerable westing
when I knew that we had been sailing due north. I blamed my crude
instrument, and kept on.  Then one afternoon the girl came to me.

"Pardon me," she said, "but were I you, I should watch this man
Benson--especially when he is in charge."  I asked her what she meant,
thinking I could see the influence of von Schoenvorts raising a
suspicion against one of my most trusted men.

"If you will note the boat's course a half-hour after Benson goes on
duty," she said, "you will know what I mean, and you will understand
why he prefers a night watch.  Possibly, too, you will understand some
other things that have taken place aboard."

Then she went back to her room, thus ending the conversation. I waited
until half an hour after Benson had gone on duty, and then I went on
deck, passing through the conning-tower where Benson sat, and looking
at the compass.  It showed that our course was north by west--that is,
one point west of north, which was, for our assumed position, about
right.  I was greatly relieved to find that nothing was wrong, for the
girl's words had caused me considerable apprehension.  I was about to
return to my room when a thought occurred to me that again caused me to
change my mind--and, incidentally, came near proving my death-warrant.

When I had left the conning-tower little more than a half-hour since,
the sea had been breaking over the port bow, and it seemed to me quite
improbable that in so short a time an equally heavy sea could be
deluging us from the opposite side of the ship--winds may change
quickly, but not a long, heavy sea.  There was only one other
solution--since I left the tower, our course had been altered some
eight points.  Turning quickly, I climbed out upon the conning-tower.
A single glance at the heavens confirmed my suspicions; the
constellations which should have been dead ahead were directly
starboard.  We were sailing due west.

Just for an instant longer I stood there to check up my calculations--I
wanted to be quite sure before I accused Benson of perfidy, and about
the only thing I came near making quite sure of was death.  I cannot
see even now how I escaped it. I was standing on the edge of the
conning-tower, when a heavy palm suddenly struck me between the
shoulders and hurled me forward into space.  The drop to the triangular
deck forward of the conning-tower might easily have broken a leg for
me, or I might have slipped off onto the deck and rolled overboard; but
fate was upon my side, as I was only slightly bruised.  As I came to my
feet, I heard the conning-tower cover slam.  There is a ladder which
leads from the deck to the top of the tower. Up this I scrambled, as
fast as I could go; but Benson had the cover tight before I reached it.

I stood there a moment in dumb consternation.  What did the fellow
intend?  What was going on below?  If Benson was a traitor, how could I
know that there were not other traitors among us? I cursed myself for
my folly in going out upon the deck, and then this thought suggested
another--a hideous one: who was it that had really been responsible for
my being here?

Thinking to attract attention from inside the craft, I again ran down
the ladder and onto the small deck only to find that the steel covers
of the conning-tower windows were shut, and then I leaned with my back
against the tower and cursed myself for a gullible idiot.

I glanced at the bow.  The sea seemed to be getting heavier, for every
wave now washed completely over the lower deck.  I watched them for a
moment, and then a sudden chill pervaded my entire being. It was not
the chill of wet clothing, or the dashing spray which drenched my face;
no, it was the chill of the hand of death upon my heart.  In an instant
I had turned the last corner of life's highway and was looking God
Almighty in the face--the U-33 was being slowly submerged!

It would be difficult, even impossible, to set down in writing my
sensations at that moment.  All I can particularly recall is that I
laughed, though neither from a spirit of bravado nor from hysteria.
And I wanted to smoke.  Lord! how I did want to smoke; but that was out
of the question.

I watched the water rise until the little deck I stood on was awash,
and then I clambered once more to the top of the conning-tower. From
the very slow submergence of the boat I knew that Benson was doing the
entire trick alone--that he was merely permitting the diving-tanks to
fill and that the diving-rudders were not in use. The throbbing of the
engines ceased, and in its stead came the steady vibration of the
electric motors.  The water was halfway up the conning-tower!  I had
perhaps five minutes longer on the deck. I tried to decide what I
should do after I was washed away.  Should I swim until exhaustion
claimed me, or should I give up and end the agony at the first plunge?

From below came two muffled reports.  They sounded not unlike shots.
Was Benson meeting with resistance?  Personally it could mean little to
me, for even though my men might overcome the enemy, none would know of
my predicament until long after it was too late to succor me. The top
of the conning-tower was now awash.  I clung to the wireless mast,
while the great waves surged sometimes completely over me.

I knew the end was near and, almost involuntarily, I did that which I
had not done since childhood--I prayed.  After that I felt better.

I clung and waited, but the water rose no higher.

Instead it receded.  Now the top of the conning-tower received only the
crests of the higher waves; now the little triangular deck below became
visible!  What had occurred within?  Did Benson believe me already
gone, and was he emerging because of that belief, or had he and his
forces been vanquished?  The suspense was more wearing than that which
I had endured while waiting for dissolution.  Presently the main deck
came into view, and then the conning-tower opened behind me, and I
turned to look into the anxious face of Bradley.  An expression of
relief overspread his features.

"Thank God, man!" was all he said as he reached forth and dragged me
into the tower.  I was cold and numb and rather all in. Another few
minutes would have done for me, I am sure, but the warmth of the
interior helped to revive me, aided and abetted by some brandy which
Bradley poured down my throat, from which it nearly removed the
membrane.  That brandy would have revived a corpse.

When I got down into the centrale, I saw the Germans lined up on one
side with a couple of my men with pistols standing over them. Von
Schoenvorts was among them.  On the floor lay Benson, moaning, and
beyond him stood the girl, a revolver in one hand. I looked about,
bewildered.

"What has happened down here?" I asked.  "Tell me!"

Bradley replied.  "You see the result, sir," he said.  "It might have
been a very different result but for Miss La Rue.  We were all asleep.
Benson had relieved the guard early in the evening; there was no one to
watch him--no one but Miss La Rue.  She felt the submergence of the
boat and came out of her room to investigate. She was just in time to
see Benson at the diving rudders.  When he saw her, he raised his
pistol and fired point-blank at her, but he missed and she fired--and
didn't miss.  The two shots awakened everyone, and as our men were
armed, the result was inevitable as you see it; but it would have been
very different had it not been for Miss La Rue.  It was she who closed
the diving-tank sea-cocks and roused Olson and me, and had the pumps
started to empty them."

And there I had been thinking that through her machinations I had been
lured to the deck and to my death!  I could have gone on my knees to
her and begged her forgiveness--or at least I could have, had I not
been Anglo-Saxon.  As it was, I could only remove my soggy cap and bow
and mumble my appreciation.  She made no reply--only turned and walked
very rapidly toward her room. Could I have heard aright?  Was it really
a sob that came floating back to me through the narrow aisle of the
U-33?

Benson died that night.  He remained defiant almost to the last; but
just before he went out, he motioned to me, and I leaned over to catch
the faintly whispered words.

"I did it alone," he said.  "I did it because I hate you--I hate all
your kind.  I was kicked out of your shipyard at Santa Monica. I was
locked out of California.  I am an I. W. W. I became a German
agent--not because I love them, for I hate them too--but because I
wanted to injure Americans, whom I hated more.  I threw the wireless
apparatus overboard.  I destroyed the chronometer and the sextant.  I
devised a scheme for varying the compass to suit my wishes.  I told
Wilson that I had seen the girl talking with von Schoenvorts, and I
made the poor egg think he had seen her doing the same thing.  I am
sorry--sorry that my plans failed. I hate you."

He didn't die for a half-hour after that; nor did he speak
again--aloud; but just a few seconds before he went to meet his Maker,
his lips moved in a faint whisper; and as I leaned closer to catch his
words, what do you suppose I heard?  "Now--I--lay me--down--to--sleep"
That was all; Benson was dead.  We threw his body overboard.

The wind of that night brought on some pretty rough weather with a lot
of black clouds which persisted for several days.  We didn't know what
course we had been holding, and there was no way of finding out, as we
could no longer trust the compass, not knowing what Benson had done to
it.  The long and the short of it was that we cruised about aimlessly
until the sun came out again.  I'll never forget that day or its
surprises.  We reckoned, or rather guessed, that we were somewhere off
the coast of Peru.  The wind, which had been blowing fitfully from the
east, suddenly veered around into the south, and presently we felt a
sudden chill.

"Peru!" snorted Olson.  "When were yez after smellin' iceber-rgs off
Peru?"

Icebergs!  "Icebergs, nothin'!" exclaimed one of the Englishmen. "Why,
man, they don't come north of fourteen here in these waters."

"Then," replied Olson, "ye're sout' of fourteen, me b'y."

We thought he was crazy; but he wasn't, for that afternoon we sighted a
great berg south of us, and we'd been running north, we thought, for
days.  I can tell you we were a discouraged lot; but we got a faint
thrill of hope early the next morning when the lookout bawled down the
open hatch:  "Land!  Land northwest by west!"

I think we were all sick for the sight of land.  I know that I was; but
my interest was quickly dissipated by the sudden illness of three of
the Germans.  Almost simultaneously they commenced vomiting. They
couldn't suggest any explanation for it.  I asked them what they had
eaten, and found they had eaten nothing other than the food cooked for
all of us.  "Have you drunk anything?"  I asked, for I knew that there
was liquor aboard, and medicines in the same locker.

"Only water," moaned one of them.  "We all drank water together this
morning.  We opened a new tank.  Maybe it was the water."

I started an investigation which revealed a terrifying condition--some
one, probably Benson, had poisoned all the running water on the ship.
It would have been worse, though, had land not been in sight.  The
sight of land filled us with renewed hope.

Our course had been altered, and we were rapidly approaching what
appeared to be a precipitous headland.  Cliffs, seemingly rising
perpendicularly out of the sea, faded away into the mist upon either
hand as we approached.  The land before us might have been a continent,
so mighty appeared the shoreline; yet we knew that we must be thousands
of miles from the nearest western land-mass--New Zealand or Australia.

We took our bearings with our crude and inaccurate instruments; we
searched the chart; we cudgeled our brains; and at last it was Bradley
who suggested a solution.  He was in the tower and watching the
compass, to which he called my attention.  The needle was pointing
straight toward the land.  Bradley swung the helm hard to starboard.  I
could feel the U-33 respond, and yet the arrow still clung straight and
sure toward the distant cliffs.

"What do you make of it?" I asked him.

"Did you ever hear of Caproni?" he asked.

"An early Italian navigator?" I returned.

"Yes; he followed Cook about 1721.  He is scarcely mentioned even by
contemporaneous historians--probably because he got into political
difficulties on his return to Italy.  It was the fashion to scoff at
his claims, but I recall reading one of his works--his only one, I
believe--in which he described a new continent in the south seas, a
continent made up of `some strange metal' which attracted the compass;
a rockbound, inhospitable coast, without beach or harbor, which
extended for hundreds of miles. He could make no landing; nor in the
several days he cruised about it did he see sign of life.  He called it
Caprona and sailed away. I believe, sir, that we are looking upon the
coast of Caprona, uncharted and forgotten for two hundred years."

"If you are right, it might account for much of the deviation of the
compass during the past two days," I suggested.  "Caprona has been
luring us upon her deadly rocks.  Well, we'll accept her challenge.
We'll land upon Caprona.  Along that long front there must be a
vulnerable spot.  We will find it, Bradley, for we must find it.  We
must find water on Caprona, or we must die."

And so we approached the coast upon which no living eyes had ever
rested.  Straight from the ocean's depths rose towering cliffs, shot
with brown and blues and greens--withered moss and lichen and the
verdigris of copper, and everywhere the rusty ocher of iron pyrites.
The cliff-tops, though ragged, were of such uniform height as to
suggest the boundaries of a great plateau, and now and again we caught
glimpses of verdure topping the rocky escarpment, as though bush or
jungle-land had pushed outward from a lush vegetation farther inland to
signal to an unseeing world that Caprona lived and joyed in life beyond
her austere and repellent coast.

But metaphor, however poetic, never slaked a dry throat. To enjoy
Caprona's romantic suggestions we must have water, and so we came in
close, always sounding, and skirted the shore. As close in as we dared
cruise, we found fathomless depths, and always the same undented
coastline of bald cliffs.  As darkness threatened, we drew away and lay
well off the coast all night. We had not as yet really commenced to
suffer for lack of water; but I knew that it would not be long before
we did, and so at the first streak of dawn I moved in again and once
more took up the hopeless survey of the forbidding coast.

Toward noon we discovered a beach, the first we had seen.  It was a
narrow strip of sand at the base of a part of the cliff that seemed
lower than any we had before scanned.  At its foot, half buried in the
sand, lay great boulders, mute evidence that in a bygone age some
mighty natural force had crumpled Caprona's barrier at this point.  It
was Bradley who first called our attention to a strange object lying
among the boulders above the surf.

"Looks like a man," he said, and passed his glasses to me.

I looked long and carefully and could have sworn that the thing I saw
was the sprawled figure of a human being.  Miss La Rue was on deck with
us.  I turned and asked her to go below.  Without a word she did as I
bade.  Then I stripped, and as I did so, Nobs looked questioningly at
me.  He had been wont at home to enter the surf with me, and evidently
he had not forgotten it.

"What are you going to do, sir?" asked Olson.

"I'm going to see what that thing is on shore," I replied. "If it's a
man, it may mean that Caprona is inhabited, or it may merely mean that
some poor devils were shipwrecked here. I ought to be able to tell from
the clothing which is more near the truth.

"How about sharks?" queried Olson.  "Sure, you ought to carry a knoife."

"Here you are, sir," cried one of the men.

It was a long slim blade he offered--one that I could carry between my
teeth--and so I accepted it gladly.

"Keep close in," I directed Bradley, and then I dived over the side and
struck out for the narrow beach.  There was another splash directly
behind me, and turning my head, I saw faithful old Nobs swimming
valiantly in my wake.

The surf was not heavy, and there was no undertow, so we made shore
easily, effecting an equally easy landing.  The beach was composed
largely of small stones worn smooth by the action of water.  There was
little sand, though from the deck of the U-33 the beach had appeared to
be all sand, and I saw no evidences of mollusca or crustacea such as
are common to all beaches I have previously seen.  I attribute this to
the fact of the smallness of the beach, the enormous depth of
surrounding water and the great distance at which Caprona lies from her
nearest neighbor.

As Nobs and I approached the recumbent figure farther up the beach, I
was appraised by my nose that whether or not, the thing had once been
organic and alive, but that for some time it had been dead.  Nobs
halted, sniffed and growled.  A little later he sat down upon his
haunches, raised his muzzle to the heavens and bayed forth a most
dismal howl.  I shied a small stone at him and bade him shut up--his
uncanny noise made me nervous.  When I had come quite close to the
thing, I still could not say whether it had been man or beast.  The
carcass was badly swollen and partly decomposed.  There was no sign of
clothing upon or about it.  A fine, brownish hair covered the chest and
abdomen, and the face, the palms of the hands, the feet, the shoulders
and back were practically hairless.  The creature must have been about
the height of a fair sized man; its features were similar to those of a
man; yet had it been a man?

I could not say, for it resembled an ape no more than it did a man.
Its large toes protruded laterally as do those of the semiarboreal
peoples of Borneo, the Philippines and other remote regions where low
types still persist.  The countenance might have been that of a cross
between Pithecanthropus, the Java ape-man, and a daughter of the
Piltdown race of prehistoric Sussex. A wooden cudgel lay beside the
corpse.

Now this fact set me thinking.  There was no wood of any description in
sight.  There was nothing about the beach to suggest a wrecked mariner.
There was absolutely nothing about the body to suggest that it might
possibly in life have known a maritime experience.  It was the body of
a low type of man or a high type of beast.  In neither instance would
it have been of a seafaring race.  Therefore I deduced that it was
native to Caprona--that it lived inland, and that it had fallen or been
hurled from the cliffs above.  Such being the case, Caprona was
inhabitable, if not inhabited, by man; but how to reach the inhabitable
interior!  That was the question.  A closer view of the cliffs than had
been afforded me from the deck of the U-33 only confirmed my conviction
that no mortal man could scale those perpendicular heights; there was
not a finger-hold, not a toe-hold, upon them.  I turned away baffled.

Nobs and I met with no sharks upon our return journey to the submarine.
My report filled everyone with theories and speculations, and with
renewed hope and determination.  They all reasoned along the same lines
that I had reasoned--the conclusions were obvious, but not the water.
We were now thirstier than ever.

The balance of that day we spent in continuing a minute and fruitless
exploration of the monotonous coast.  There was not another break in
the frowning cliffs--not even another minute patch of pebbly beach.  As
the sun fell, so did our spirits. I had tried to make advances to the
girl again; but she would have none of me, and so I was not only
thirsty but otherwise sad and downhearted.  I was glad when the new day
broke the hideous spell of a sleepless night.

The morning's search brought us no shred of hope.  Caprona was
impregnable--that was the decision of all; yet we kept on.  It must
have been about two bells of the afternoon watch that Bradley called my
attention to the branch of a tree, with leaves upon it, floating on the
sea.  "It may have been carried down to the ocean by a river," he
suggested.

"Yes," I replied, "it may have; it may have tumbled or been thrown off
the top of one of these cliffs."

Bradley's face fell.  "I thought of that, too," he replied, "but I
wanted to believe the other."

"Right you are!" I cried.  "We must believe the other until we prove it
false.  We can't afford to give up heart now, when we need heart most.
The branch was carried down by a river, and we are going to find that
river." I smote my open palm with a clenched fist, to emphasize a
determination unsupported by hope. "There!" I cried suddenly.  "See
that, Bradley?"  And I pointed at a spot closer to shore.  "See that,
man!"  Some flowers and grasses and another leafy branch floated toward
us.  We both scanned the water and the coastline.  Bradley evidently
discovered something, or at least thought that he had.  He called down
for a bucket and a rope, and when they were passed up to him, he
lowered the former into the sea and drew it in filled with water.  Of
this he took a taste, and straightening up, looked into my eyes with an
expression of elation--as much as to say "I told you so!"

"This water is warm," he announced, "and fresh!"

I grabbed the bucket and tasted its contents.  The water was very warm,
and it was fresh, but there was a most unpleasant taste to it.

"Did you ever taste water from a stagnant pool full of tadpoles?"
Bradley asked.

"That's it," I exclaimed, "--that's just the taste exactly, though I
haven't experienced it since boyhood; but how can water from a flowing
stream, taste thus, and what the dickens makes it so warm?  It must be
at least 70 or 80 Fahrenheit, possibly higher."

"Yes," agreed Bradley, "I should say higher; but where does it come
from?"

"That is easily discovered now that we have found it," I answered. "It
can't come from the ocean; so it must come from the land. All that we
have to do is follow it, and sooner or later we shall come upon its
source."

We were already rather close in; but I ordered the U-33's prow turned
inshore and we crept slowly along, constantly dipping up the water and
tasting it to assure ourselves that we didn't get outside the
fresh-water current.  There was a very light off-shore wind and
scarcely any breakers, so that the approach to the shore was continued
without finding bottom; yet though we were already quite close, we saw
no indication of any indention in the coast from which even a tiny
brooklet might issue, and certainly no mouth of a large river such as
this must necessarily be to freshen the ocean even two hundred yards
from shore.  The tide was running out, and this, together with the
strong flow of the freshwater current, would have prevented our going
against the cliffs even had we not been under power; as it was we had
to buck the combined forces in order to hold our position at all.  We
came up to within twenty-five feet of the sheer wall, which loomed high
above us. There was no break in its forbidding face.  As we watched the
face of the waters and searched the cliff's high face, Olson suggested
that the fresh water might come from a submarine geyser.  This, he
said, would account for its heat; but even as he spoke a bush, covered
thickly with leaves and flowers, bubbled to the surface and floated off
astern.

"Flowering shrubs don't thrive in the subterranean caverns from which
geysers spring," suggested Bradley.

Olson shook his head.  "It beats me," he said.

"I've got it!" I exclaimed suddenly.  "Look there!"  And I pointed at
the base of the cliff ahead of us, which the receding tide was
gradually exposing to our view.  They all looked, and all saw what I
had seen--the top of a dark opening in the rock, through which water
was pouring out into the sea.  "It's the subterranean channel of an
inland river," I cried.  "It flows through a land covered with
vegetation--and therefore a land upon which the sun shines.  No
subterranean caverns produce any order of plant life even remotely
resembling what we have seen disgorged by this river.  Beyond those
cliffs lie fertile lands and fresh water--perhaps, game!"

"Yis, sir," said Olson, "behoind the cliffs!  Ye spoke a true word,
sir--behoind!"

Bradley laughed--a rather sorry laugh, though.  "You might as well call
our attention to the fact, sir," he said, "that science has indicated
that there is fresh water and vegetation on Mars."

"Not at all," I rejoined.  "A U-boat isn't constructed to navigate
space, but it is designed to travel below the surface of the water."

"You'd be after sailin' into that blank pocket?" asked Olson.

"I would, Olson," I replied.  "We haven't one chance for life in a
hundred thousand if we don't find food and water upon Caprona. This
water coming out of the cliff is not salt; but neither is it fit to
drink, though each of us has drunk.  It is fair to assume that inland
the river is fed by pure streams, that there are fruits and herbs and
game.  Shall we lie out here and die of thirst and starvation with a
land of plenty possibly only a few hundred yards away?  We have the
means for navigating a subterranean river.  Are we too cowardly to
utilize this means?"

"Be afther goin' to it," said Olson.

"I'm willing to see it through," agreed Bradley.

"Then under the bottom, wi' the best o' luck an' give 'em hell!" cried
a young fellow who had been in the trenches.

"To the diving-stations!"  I commanded, and in less than a minute the
deck was deserted, the conning-tower covers had slammed to and the U-33
was submerging--possibly for the last time.  I know that I had this
feeling, and I think that most of the others did.

As we went down, I sat in the tower with the searchlight projecting its
seemingly feeble rays ahead.  We submerged very slowly and without
headway more than sufficient to keep her nose in the right direction,
and as we went down, I saw outlined ahead of us the black opening in
the great cliff.  It was an opening that would have admitted a
half-dozen U-boats at one and the same time, roughly cylindrical in
contour--and dark as the pit of perdition.

As I gave the command which sent the U-33 slowly ahead, I could not but
feel a certain uncanny presentiment of evil.  Where were we going?
What lay at the end of this great sewer?  Had we bidden farewell
forever to the sunlight and life, or were there before us dangers even
greater than those which we now faced?  I tried to keep my mind from
vain imagining by calling everything which I observed to the eager ears
below.  I was the eyes of the whole company, and I did my best not to
fail them.  We had advanced a hundred yards, perhaps, when our first
danger confronted us. Just ahead was a sharp right-angle turn in the
tunnel.  I could see the river's flotsam hurtling against the rocky
wall upon the left as it was driven on by the mighty current, and I
feared for the safety of the U-33 in making so sharp a turn under such
adverse conditions; but there was nothing for it but to try. I didn't
warn my fellows of the danger--it could have but caused them useless
apprehension, for if we were to be smashed against the rocky wall, no
power on earth could avert the quick end that would come to us. I gave
the command full speed ahead and went charging toward the menace.  I
was forced to approach the dangerous left-hand wall in order to make
the turn, and I depended upon the power of the motors to carry us
through the surging waters in safety.  Well, we made it; but it was a
narrow squeak.  As we swung around, the full force of the current
caught us and drove the stern against the rocks; there was a thud which
sent a tremor through the whole craft, and then a moment of nasty
grinding as the steel hull scraped the rock wall.  I expected
momentarily the inrush of waters that would seal our doom; but
presently from below came the welcome word that all was well.

In another fifty yards there was a second turn, this time toward the
left! but it was more of a gentle curve, and we took it without
trouble.  After that it was plain sailing, though as far as I could
know, there might be most anything ahead of us, and my nerves strained
to the snapping-point every instant.  After the second turn the channel
ran comparatively straight for between one hundred and fifty and two
hundred yards.  The waters grew suddenly lighter, and my spirits rose
accordingly.  I shouted down to those below that I saw daylight ahead,
and a great shout of thanksgiving reverberated through the ship.  A
moment later we emerged into sunlit water, and immediately I raised the
periscope and looked about me upon the strangest landscape I had ever
seen.

We were in the middle of a broad and now sluggish river the banks of
which were lined by giant, arboraceous ferns, raising their mighty
fronds fifty, one hundred, two hundred feet into the quiet air.  Close
by us something rose to the surface of the river and dashed at the
periscope.  I had a vision of wide, distended jaws, and then all was
blotted out.  A shiver ran down into the tower as the thing closed upon
the periscope.  A moment later it was gone, and I could see again.
Above the trees there soared into my vision a huge thing on batlike
wings--a creature large as a large whale, but fashioned more after the
order of a lizard.  Then again something charged the periscope and
blotted out the mirror.  I will confess that I was almost gasping for
breath as I gave the commands to emerge.  Into what sort of strange
land had fate guided us?

The instant the deck was awash, I opened the conning-tower hatch and
stepped out.  In another minute the deck-hatch lifted, and those who
were not on duty below streamed up the ladder, Olson bringing Nobs
under one arm.  For several minutes no one spoke; I think they must
each have been as overcome by awe as was I. All about us was a flora
and fauna as strange and wonderful to us as might have been those upon
a distant planet had we suddenly been miraculously transported through
ether to an unknown world. Even the grass upon the nearer bank was
unearthly--lush and high it grew, and each blade bore upon its tip a
brilliant flower--violet or yellow or carmine or blue--making as
gorgeous a sward as human imagination might conceive.  But the life!
It teemed. The tall, fernlike trees were alive with monkeys, snakes,
and lizards. Huge insects hummed and buzzed hither and thither.  Mighty
forms could be seen moving upon the ground in the thick forest, while
the bosom of the river wriggled with living things, and above flapped
the wings of gigantic creatures such as we are taught have been extinct
throughout countless ages.

"Look!" cried Olson.  "Would you look at the giraffe comin' up out o'
the bottom of the say?"  We looked in the direction he pointed and saw
a long, glossy neck surmounted by a small head rising above the surface
of the river.  Presently the back of the creature was exposed, brown
and glossy as the water dripped from it. It turned its eyes upon us,
opened its lizard-like mouth, emitted a shrill hiss and came for us.
The thing must have been sixteen or eighteen feet in length and closely
resembled pictures I had seen of restored plesiosaurs of the lower
Jurassic.  It charged us as savagely as a mad bull, and one would have
thought it intended to destroy and devour the mighty U-boat, as I
verily believe it did intend.

We were moving slowly up the river as the creature bore down upon us
with distended jaws.  The long neck was far outstretched, and the four
flippers with which it swam were working with powerful strokes,
carrying it forward at a rapid pace.  When it reached the craft's side,
the jaws closed upon one of the stanchions of the deck rail and tore it
from its socket as though it had been a toothpick stuck in putty.  At
this exhibition of titanic strength I think we all simultaneously
stepped backward, and Bradley drew his revolver and fired.  The bullet
struck the thing in the neck, just above its body; but instead of
disabling it, merely increased its rage.  Its hissing rose to a shrill
scream as it raised half its body out of water onto the sloping sides
of the hull of the U-33 and endeavored to scramble upon the deck to
devour us.  A dozen shots rang out as we who were armed drew our
pistols and fired at the thing; but though struck several times, it
showed no signs of succumbing and only floundered farther aboard the
submarine.

I had noticed that the girl had come on deck and was standing not far
behind me, and when I saw the danger to which we were all exposed, I
turned and forced her toward the hatch.  We had not spoken for some
days, and we did not speak now; but she gave me a disdainful look,
which was quite as eloquent as words, and broke loose from my grasp.  I
saw I could do nothing with her unless I exerted force, and so I turned
with my back toward her that I might be in a position to shield her
from the strange reptile should it really succeed in reaching the deck;
and as I did so I saw the thing raise one flipper over the rail, dart
its head forward and with the quickness of lightning seize upon one of
the boches.  I ran forward, discharging my pistol into the creature's
body in an effort to force it to relinquish its prey; but I might as
profitably have shot at the sun.

Shrieking and screaming, the German was dragged from the deck, and the
moment the reptile was clear of the boat, it dived beneath the surface
of the water with its terrified prey. I think we were all more or less
shaken by the frightfulness of the tragedy--until Olson remarked that
the balance of power now rested where it belonged.  Following the death
of Benson we had been nine and nine--nine Germans and nine "Allies," as
we called ourselves, now there were but eight Germans.  We never
counted the girl on either side, I suppose because she was a girl,
though we knew well enough now that she was ours.

And so Olson's remark helped to clear the atmosphere for the Allies at
least, and then our attention was once more directed toward the river,
for around us there had sprung up a perfect bedlam of screams and
hisses and a seething caldron of hideous reptiles, devoid of fear and
filled only with hunger and with rage. They clambered, squirmed and
wriggled to the deck, forcing us steadily backward, though we emptied
our pistols into them. There were all sorts and conditions of horrible
things--huge, hideous, grotesque, monstrous--a veritable Mesozoic
nightmare. I saw that the girl was gotten below as quickly as possible,
and she took Nobs with her--poor Nobs had nearly barked his head off;
and I think, too, that for the first time since his littlest puppyhood
he had known fear; nor can I blame him.  After the girl I sent Bradley
and most of the Allies and then the Germans who were on deck--von
Schoenvorts being still in irons below.

The creatures were approaching perilously close before I dropped
through the hatchway and slammed down the cover.  Then I went into the
tower and ordered full speed ahead, hoping to distance the fearsome
things; but it was useless.  Not only could any of them easily
outdistance the U-33, but the further upstream we progressed the
greater the number of our besiegers, until fearful of navigating a
strange river at high speed, I gave orders to reduce and moved slowly
and majestically through the plunging, hissing mass.  I was mighty glad
that our entrance into the interior of Caprona had been inside a
submarine rather than in any other form of vessel.  I could readily
understand how it might have been that Caprona had been invaded in the
past by venturesome navigators without word of it ever reaching the
outside world, for I can assure you that only by submarine could man
pass up that great sluggish river, alive.

We proceeded up the river for some forty miles before darkness overtook
us.  I was afraid to submerge and lie on the bottom overnight for fear
that the mud might be deep enough to hold us, and as we could not hold
with the anchor, I ran in close to shore, and in a brief interim of
attack from the reptiles we made fast to a large tree.  We also dipped
up some of the river water and found it, though quite warm, a little
sweeter than before. We had food enough, and with the water we were all
quite refreshed; but we missed fresh meat.  It had been weeks, now,
since we had tasted it, and the sight of the reptiles gave me an
idea--that a steak or two from one of them might not be bad eating.  So
I went on deck with a rifle, twenty of which were aboard the U-33.  At
sight of me a huge thing charged and climbed to the deck.  I retreated
to the top of the conning-tower, and when it had raised its mighty bulk
to the level of the little deck on which I stood, I let it have a
bullet right between the eyes.

The thing stopped then and looked at me a moment as much as to say:
"Why this thing has a stinger!  I must be careful." And then it reached
out its long neck and opened its mighty jaws and grabbed for me; but I
wasn't there.  I had tumbled backward into the tower, and I mighty near
killed myself doing it.  When I glanced up, that little head on the end
of its long neck was coming straight down on top of me, and once more I
tumbled into greater safety, sprawling upon the floor of the centrale.

Olson was looking up, and seeing what was poking about in the tower,
ran for an ax; nor did he hesitate a moment when he returned with one,
but sprang up the ladder and commenced chopping away at that hideous
face.  The thing didn't have sufficient brainpan to entertain more than
a single idea at once. Though chopped and hacked, and with a bullethole
between its eyes, it still persisted madly in its attempt to get inside
the tower and devour Olson, though its body was many times the diameter
of the hatch; nor did it cease its efforts until after Olson had
succeeded in decapitating it.  Then the two men went on deck through
the main hatch, and while one kept watch, the other cut a hind quarter
off Plesiosaurus Olsoni, as Bradley dubbed the thing.  Meantime Olson
cut off the long neck, saying that it would make fine soup.  By the
time we had cleared away the blood and refuse in the tower, the cook
had juicy steaks and a steaming broth upon the electric stove, and the
aroma arising from P. Olsoni filled us an with a hitherto unfelt
admiration for him and all his kind.



Chapter 5

The steaks we had that night, and they were fine; and the following
morning we tasted the broth.  It seemed odd to be eating a creature
that should, by all the laws of paleontology, have been extinct for
several million years.  It gave one a feeling of newness that was
almost embarrassing, although it didn't seem to embarrass our
appetites.  Olson ate until I thought he would burst.

The girl ate with us that night at the little officers' mess just back
of the torpedo compartment.  The narrow table was unfolded; the four
stools were set out; and for the first time in days we sat down to eat,
and for the first time in weeks we had something to eat other than the
monotony of the short rations of an impoverished U-boat.  Nobs sat
between the girl and me and was fed with morsels of the Plesiosaurus
steak, at the risk of forever contaminating his manners.  He looked at
me sheepishly all the time, for he knew that no well-bred dog should
eat at table; but the poor fellow was so wasted from improper food that
I couldn't enjoy my own meal had he been denied an immediate share in
it; and anyway Lys wanted to feed him.  So there you are.

Lys was coldly polite to me and sweetly gracious to Bradley and Olson.
She wasn't of the gushing type, I knew; so I didn't expect much from
her and was duly grateful for the few morsels of attention she threw
upon the floor to me.  We had a pleasant meal, with only one
unfortunate occurrence--when Olson suggested that possibly the creature
we were eating was the same one that ate the German.  It was some time
before we could persuade the girl to continue her meal, but at last
Bradley prevailed upon her, pointing out that we had come upstream
nearly forty miles since the boche had been seized, and that during
that time we had seen literally thousands of these denizens of the
river, indicating that the chances were very remote that this was the
same Plesiosaur.  "And anyway," he concluded, "it was only a scheme of
Mr. Olson's to get all the steaks for himself."

We discussed the future and ventured opinions as to what lay before us;
but we could only theorize at best, for none of us knew.  If the whole
land was infested by these and similar horrid monsters, life would be
impossible upon it, and we decided that we would only search long
enough to find and take aboard fresh water and such meat and fruits as
might be safely procurable and then retrace our way beneath the cliffs
to the open sea.

And so at last we turned into our narrow bunks, hopeful, happy and at
peace with ourselves, our lives and our God, to awaken the following
morning refreshed and still optimistic.  We had an easy time getting
away--as we learned later, because the saurians do not commence to feed
until late in the morning.  From noon to midnight their curve of
activity is at its height, while from dawn to about nine o'clock it is
lowest.  As a matter of fact, we didn't see one of them all the time we
were getting under way, though I had the cannon raised to the deck and
manned against an assault.  I hoped, but I was none too sure, that
shells might discourage them.  The trees were full of monkeys of all
sizes and shades, and once we thought we saw a manlike creature
watching us from the depth of the forest.

Shortly after we resumed our course upstream, we saw the mouth of
another and smaller river emptying into the main channel from the
south--that is, upon our right; and almost immediately after we came
upon a large island five or six miles in length; and at fifty miles
there was a still larger river than the last coming in from the
northwest, the course of the main stream having now changed to
northeast by southwest.  The water was quite free from reptiles, and
the vegetation upon the banks of the river had altered to more open and
parklike forest, with eucalyptus and acacia mingled with a scattering
of tree ferns, as though two distinct periods of geologic time had
overlapped and merged. The grass, too, was less flowering, though there
were still gorgeous patches mottling the greensward; and lastly, the
fauna was less multitudinous.

Six or seven miles farther, and the river widened considerably; before
us opened an expanse of water to the farther horizon, and then we
sailed out upon an inland sea so large that only a shore-line upon our
side was visible to us.  The waters all about us were alive with life.
There were still a few reptiles; but there were fish by the thousands,
by the millions.

The water of the inland sea was very warm, almost hot, and the
atmosphere was hot and heavy above it.  It seemed strange that beyond
the buttressed walls of Caprona icebergs floated and the south wind was
biting, for only a gentle breeze moved across the face of these living
waters, and that was damp and warm. Gradually, we commenced to divest
ourselves of our clothing, retaining only sufficient for modesty; but
the sun was not hot. It was more the heat of a steam-room than of an
oven.

We coasted up the shore of the lake in a north-westerly direction,
sounding all the time.  We found the lake deep and the bottom rocky and
steeply shelving toward the center, and once when I moved straight out
from shore to take other soundings we could find no bottom whatsoever.
In open spaces along the shore we caught occasional glimpses of the
distant cliffs, and here they appeared only a trifle less precipitous
than those which bound Caprona on the seaward side.  My theory is that
in a far distant era Caprona was a mighty mountain--perhaps the world's
mightiest volcanic action blew off the entire crest, blew thousands of
feet of the mountain upward and outward and onto the surrounding
continent, leaving a great crater; and then, possibly, the continent
sank as ancient continents have been known to do, leaving only the
summit of Caprona above the sea. The encircling walls, the central
lake, the hot springs which feed the lake, all point to a conclusion,
and the fauna and the flora bear indisputable evidence that Caprona was
once part of some great land-mass.

As we cruised up along the coast, the landscape continued a more or
less open forest, with here and there a small plain where we saw
animals grazing.  With my glass I could make out a species of large red
deer, some antelope and what appeared to be a species of horse; and
once I saw the shaggy form of what might have been a monstrous bison.
Here was game a plenty!  There seemed little danger of starving upon
Caprona.  The game, however, seemed wary; for the instant the animals
discovered us, they threw up their heads and tails and went cavorting
off, those farther inland following the example of the others until all
were lost in the mazes of the distant forest.  Only the great, shaggy
ox stood his ground.  With lowered head he watched us until we had
passed, and then continued feeding.

About twenty miles up the coast from the mouth of the river we
encountered low cliffs of sandstone, broken and tortured evidence of
the great upheaval which had torn Caprona asunder in the past,
intermingling upon a common level the rock formations of widely
separated eras, fusing some and leaving others untouched.

We ran along beside them for a matter of ten miles, arriving off a
broad cleft which led into what appeared to be another lake. As we were
in search of pure water, we did not wish to overlook any portion of the
coast, and so after sounding and finding that we had ample depth, I ran
the U-33 between head-lands into as pretty a landlocked harbor as
sailormen could care to see, with good water right up to within a few
yards of the shore.  As we cruised slowly along, two of the boches
again saw what they believed to be a man, or manlike creature, watching
us from a fringe of trees a hundred yards inland, and shortly after we
discovered the mouth of a small stream emptying into the bay: It was
the first stream we had found since leaving the river, and I at once
made preparations to test its water.  To land, it would be necessary to
run the U-33 close in to the shore, at least as close as we could, for
even these waters were infested, though, not so thickly, by savage
reptiles.  I ordered sufficient water let into the diving-tanks to
lower us about a foot, and then I ran the bow slowly toward the shore,
confident that should we run aground, we still had sufficient lifting
force to free us when the water should be pumped out of the tanks; but
the bow nosed its way gently into the reeds and touched the shore with
the keel still clear.

My men were all armed now with both rifles and pistols, each having
plenty of ammunition.  I ordered one of the Germans ashore with a line,
and sent two of my own men to guard him, for from what little we had
seen of Caprona, or Caspak as we learned later to call the interior, we
realized that any instant some new and terrible danger might confront
us.  The line was made fast to a small tree, and at the same time I had
the stern anchor dropped.

As soon as the boche and his guard were aboard again, I called all
hands on deck, including von Schoenvorts, and there I explained to them
that the time had come for us to enter into some sort of an agreement
among ourselves that would relieve us of the annoyance and
embarrassment of being divided into two antagonistic parts--prisoners
and captors.  I told them that it was obvious our very existence
depended upon our unity of action, that we were to all intent and
purpose entering a new world as far from the seat and causes of our own
world-war as if millions of miles of space and eons of time separated
us from our past lives and habitations.

"There is no reason why we should carry our racial and political
hatreds into Caprona," I insisted.  "The Germans among us might kill
all the English, or the English might kill the last German, without
affecting in the slightest degree either the outcome of even the
smallest skirmish upon the western front or the opinion of a single
individual in any belligerent or neutral country. I therefore put the
issue squarely to you all; shall we bury our animosities and work
together with and for one another while we remain upon Caprona, or must
we continue thus divided and but half armed, possibly until death has
claimed the last of us?  And let me tell you, if you have not already
realized it, the chances are a thousand to one that not one of us ever
will see the outside world again.  We are safe now in the matter of
food and water; we could provision the U-33 for a long cruise; but we
are practically out of fuel, and without fuel we cannot hope to reach
the ocean, as only a submarine can pass through the barrier cliffs.
What is your answer?" I turned toward von Schoenvorts.

He eyed me in that disagreeable way of his and demanded to know, in
case they accepted my suggestion, what their status would be in event
of our finding a way to escape with the U-33.  I replied that I felt
that if we had all worked loyally together we should leave Caprona upon
a common footing, and to that end I suggested that should the remote
possibility of our escape in the submarine develop into reality, we
should then immediately make for the nearest neutral port and give
ourselves into the hands of the authorities, when we should all
probably be interned for the duration of the war.  To my surprise he
agreed that this was fair and told me that they would accept my
conditions and that I could depend upon their loyalty to the common
cause.

I thanked him and then addressed each one of his men individually, and
each gave me his word that he would abide by all that I had outlined.
It was further understood that we were to act as a military
organization under military rules and discipline--I as commander, with
Bradley as my first lieutenant and Olson as my second, in command of
the Englishmen; while von Schoenvorts was to act as an additional
second lieutenant and have charge of his own men.  The four of us were
to constitute a military court under which men might be tried and
sentenced to punishment for infraction of military rules and
discipline, even to the passing of the death-sentence.

I then had arms and ammunition issued to the Germans, and leaving
Bradley and five men to guard the U-33, the balance of us went ashore.
The first thing we did was to taste the water of the little
stream--which, to our delight, we found sweet, pure and cold.  This
stream was entirely free from dangerous reptiles, because, as I later
discovered, they became immediately dormant when subjected to a much
lower temperature than 70 degrees Fahrenheit.  They dislike cold water
and keep as far away from it as possible.  There were countless
brook-trout here, and deep holes that invited us to bathe, and along
the bank of the stream were trees bearing a close resemblance to ash
and beech and oak, their characteristics evidently induced by the lower
temperature of the air above the cold water and by the fact that their
roots were watered by the water from the stream rather than from the
warm springs which we afterward found in such abundance elsewhere.

Our first concern was to fill the water tanks of the U-33 with fresh
water, and that having been accomplished, we set out to hunt for game
and explore inland for a short distance.  Olson, von Schoenvorts, two
Englishmen and two Germans accompanied me, leaving ten to guard the
ship and the girl.  I had intended leaving Nobs behind, but he got away
and joined me and was so happy over it that I hadn't the heart to send
him back.  We followed the stream upward through a beautiful country
for about five miles, and then came upon its source in a little
boulder-strewn clearing. From among the rocks bubbled fully twenty
ice-cold springs. North of the clearing rose sandstone cliffs to a
height of some fifty to seventy-five feet, with tall trees growing at
their base and almost concealing them from our view.  To the west the
country was flat and sparsely wooded, and here it was that we saw our
first game--a large red deer.  It was grazing away from us and had not
seen us when one of my men called my attention to it.  Motioning for
silence and having the rest of the party lie down, I crept toward the
quarry, accompanied only by Whitely.  We got within a hundred yards of
the deer when he suddenly raised his antlered head and pricked up his
great ears.  We both fired at once and had the satisfaction of seeing
the buck drop; then we ran forward to finish him with our knives.  The
deer lay in a small open space close to a clump of acacias, and we had
advanced to within several yards of our kill when we both halted
suddenly and simultaneously. Whitely looked at me, and I looked at
Whitely, and then we both looked back in the direction of the deer.

"Blime!" he said.  "Wot is hit, sir?"

"It looks to me, Whitely, like an error," I said; "some assistant god
who had been creating elephants must have been temporarily transferred
to the lizard-department."

"Hi wouldn't s'y that, sir," said Whitely; "it sounds blasphemous."

"It is more blasphemous than that thing which is swiping our meat," I
replied, for whatever the thing was, it had leaped upon our deer and
was devouring it in great mouthfuls which it swallowed without
mastication.  The creature appeared to be a great lizard at least ten
feet high, with a huge, powerful tail as long as its torso, mighty hind
legs and short forelegs.  When it had advanced from the wood, it hopped
much after the fashion of a kangaroo, using its hind feet and tail to
propel it, and when it stood erect, it sat upon its tail.  Its head was
long and thick, with a blunt muzzle, and the opening of the jaws ran
back to a point behind the eyes, and the jaws were armed with long
sharp teeth. The scaly body was covered with black and yellow spots
about a foot in diameter and irregular in contour.  These spots were
outlined in red with edgings about an inch wide.  The underside of the
chest, body and tail were a greenish white.

"Wot s'y we pot the bloomin' bird, sir?" suggested Whitely.

I told him to wait until I gave the word; then we would fire
simultaneously, he at the heart and I at the spine.

"Hat the 'eart, sir--yes, sir," he replied, and raised his piece to his
shoulder.

Our shots rang out together.  The thing raised its head and looked
about until its eyes rested upon us; then it gave vent to a most
appalling hiss that rose to the crescendo of a terrific shriek and came
for us.

"Beat it, Whitely!" I cried as I turned to run.

We were about a quarter of a mile from the rest of our party, and in
full sight of them as they lay in the tall grass watching us. That they
saw all that had happened was evidenced by the fact that they now rose
and ran toward us, and at their head leaped Nobs. The creature in our
rear was gaining on us rapidly when Nobs flew past me like a meteor and
rushed straight for the frightful reptile. I tried to recall him, but
he would pay no attention to me, and as I couldn't see him sacrificed,
I, too, stopped and faced the monster. The creature appeared to be more
impressed with Nobs than by us and our firearms, for it stopped as the
Airedale dashed at it growling, and struck at him viciously with its
powerful jaws.

Nobs, though, was lightning by comparison with the slow thinking beast
and dodged his opponent's thrust with ease.  Then he raced to the rear
of the tremendous thing and seized it by the tail. There Nobs made the
error of his life.  Within that mottled organ were the muscles of a
Titan, the force of a dozen mighty catapults, and the owner of the tail
was fully aware of the possibilities which it contained.  With a single
flip of the tip it sent poor Nobs sailing through the air a hundred
feet above the ground, straight back into the clump of acacias from
which the beast had leaped upon our kill--and then the grotesque thing
sank lifeless to the ground.

Olson and von Schoenvorts came up a minute later with their men; then
we all cautiously approached the still form upon the ground. The
creature was quite dead, and an examination resulted in disclosing the
fact that Whitely's bullet had pierced its heart, and mine had severed
the spinal cord.

"But why didn't it die instantly?" I exclaimed.

"Because," said von Schoenvorts in his disagreeable way, "the beast is
so large, and its nervous organization of so low a caliber, that it
took all this time for the intelligence of death to reach and be
impressed upon the minute brain.  The thing was dead when your bullets
struck it; but it did not know it for several seconds--possibly a
minute.  If I am not mistaken, it is an Allosaurus of the Upper
Jurassic, remains of which have been found in Central Wyoming, in the
suburbs of New York."

An Irishman by the name of Brady grinned.  I afterward learned that he
had served three years on the traffic-squad of the Chicago police force.

I had been calling Nobs in the meantime and was about to set out in
search of him, fearing, to tell the truth, to do so lest I find him
mangled and dead among the trees of the acacia grove, when he suddenly
emerged from among the boles, his ears flattened, his tail between his
legs and his body screwed into a suppliant S. He was unharmed except
for minor bruises; but he was the most chastened dog I have ever seen.

We gathered up what was left of the red deer after skinning and
cleaning it, and set out upon our return journey toward the U-boat. On
the way Olson, von Schoenvorts and I discussed the needs of our
immediate future, and we were unanimous in placing foremost the
necessity of a permanent camp on shore.  The interior of a U-boat is
about as impossible and uncomfortable an abiding-place as one can well
imagine, and in this warm climate, and in warm water, it was almost
unendurable.  So we decided to construct a palisaded camp.



Chapter 6

As we strolled slowly back toward the boat, planning and discussing
this, we were suddenly startled by a loud and unmistakable detonation.

"A shell from the U-33!" exclaimed von Schoenvorts.

"What can be after signifyin'?" queried Olson.

"They are in trouble," I answered for all, "and it's up to us to get
back to them.  Drop that carcass," I directed the men carrying the
meat, "and follow me!"  I set off at a rapid run in the direction of
the harbor.

We ran for the better part of a mile without hearing anything more from
the direction of the harbor, and then I reduced the speed to a walk,
for the exercise was telling on us who had been cooped up for so long
in the confined interior of the U-33. Puffing and panting, we plodded
on until within about a mile of the harbor we came upon a sight that
brought us all up standing. We had been passing through a little
heavier timber than was usual to this part of the country, when we
suddenly emerged into an open space in the center of which was such a
band as might have caused the most courageous to pause.  It consisted
of upward of five hundred individuals representing several species
closely allied to man.  There were anthropoid apes and gorillas--these
I had no difficulty in recognizing; but there were other forms which I
had never before seen, and I was hard put to it to say whether they
were ape or man.  Some of them resembled the corpse we had found upon
the narrow beach against Caprona's sea-wall, while others were of a
still lower type, more nearly resembling the apes, and yet others were
uncannily manlike, standing there erect, being less hairy and
possessing better shaped heads.

There was one among the lot, evidently the leader of them, who bore a
close resemblance to the so-called Neanderthal man of La
Chapelle-aux-Saints.  There was the same short, stocky trunk upon which
rested an enormous head habitually bent forward into the same curvature
as the back, the arms shorter than the legs, and the lower leg
considerably shorter than that of modern man, the knees bent forward
and never straightened.  This creature and one or two others who
appeared to be of a lower order than he, yet higher than that of the
apes, carried heavy clubs; the others were armed only with giant
muscles and fighting fangs--nature's weapons. All were males, and all
were entirely naked; nor was there upon even the highest among them a
sign of ornamentation.

At sight of us they turned with bared fangs and low growls to confront
us.  I did not wish to fire among them unless it became absolutely
necessary, and so I started to lead my party around them; but the
instant that the Neanderthal man guessed my intention, he evidently
attributed it to cowardice upon our part, and with a wild cry he leaped
toward us, waving his cudgel above his head.  The others followed him,
and in a minute we should have been overwhelmed.  I gave the order to
fire, and at the first volley six of them went down, including the
Neanderthal man. The others hesitated a moment and then broke for the
trees, some running nimbly among the branches, while others lost
themselves to us between the boles.  Both von Schoenvorts and I noticed
that at least two of the higher, manlike types took to the trees quite
as nimbly as the apes, while others that more nearly approached man in
carriage and appearance sought safety upon the ground with the gorillas.

An examination disclosed that five of our erstwhile opponents were dead
and the sixth, the Neanderthal man, was but slightly wounded, a bullet
having glanced from his thick skull, stunning him. We decided to take
him with us to camp, and by means of belts we managed to secure his
hands behind his back and place a leash around his neck before he
regained consciousness.  We then retraced our steps for our meat being
convinced by our own experience that those aboard the U-33 had been
able to frighten off this party with a single shell--but when we came
to where we had left the deer it had disappeared.

On the return journey Whitely and I preceded the rest of the party by
about a hundred yards in the hope of getting another shot at something
edible, for we were all greatly disgusted and disappointed by the loss
of our venison.  Whitely and I advanced very cautiously, and not having
the whole party with us, we fared better than on the journey out,
bagging two large antelope not a half-mile from the harbor; so with our
game and our prisoner we made a cheerful return to the boat, where we
found that all were safe.  On the shore a little north of where we lay
there were the corpses of twenty of the wild creatures who had attacked
Bradley and his party in our absence, and the rest of whom we had met
and scattered a few minutes later.

We felt that we had taught these wild ape-men a lesson and that because
of it we would be safer in the future--at least safer from them; but we
decided not to abate our carefulness one whit; feeling that this new
world was filled with terrors still unknown to us; nor were we wrong.

The following morning we commenced work upon our camp, Bradley, Olson,
von Schoenvorts, Miss La Rue, and I having sat up half the night
discussing the matter and drawing plans.  We set the men at work
felling trees, selecting for the purpose jarrah, a hard,
weather-resisting timber which grew in profusion near by.  Half the men
labored while the other half stood guard, alternating each hour with an
hour off at noon.  Olson directed this work.  Bradley, von Schoenvorts
and I, with Miss La Rue's help, staked out the various buildings and
the outer wall.  When the day was done, we had quite an array of logs
nicely notched and ready for our building operations on the morrow, and
we were all tired, for after the buildings had been staked out we all
fell in and helped with the logging--all but von Schoenvorts.  He,
being a Prussian and a gentleman, couldn't stoop to such menial labor
in the presence of his men, and I didn't see fit to ask it of him, as
the work was purely voluntary upon our part.  He spent the afternoon
shaping a swagger-stick from the branch of jarrah and talking with Miss
La Rue, who had sufficiently unbent toward him to notice his existence.

We saw nothing of the wild men of the previous day, and only once were
we menaced by any of the strange denizens of Caprona, when some
frightful nightmare of the sky swooped down upon us, only to be driven
off by a fusillade of bullets.  The thing appeared to be some variety
of pterodactyl, and what with its enormous size and ferocious aspect
was most awe-inspiring.  There was another incident, too, which to me
at least was far more unpleasant than the sudden onslaught of the
prehistoric reptile.  Two of the men, both Germans, were stripping a
felled tree of its branches. Von Schoenvorts had completed his
swagger-stick, and he and I were passing close to where the two worked.

One of them threw to his rear a small branch that he had just chopped
off, and as misfortune would have it, it struck von Schoenvorts across
the face.  It couldn't have hurt him, for it didn't leave a mark; but
he flew into a terrific rage, shouting: "Attention!" in a loud voice.
The sailor immediately straightened up, faced his officer, clicked his
heels together and saluted.  "Pig!" roared the Baron, and struck the
fellow across the face, breaking his nose.  I grabbed von Schoenvorts'
arm and jerked him away before he could strike again, if such had been
his intention, and then he raised his little stick to strike me; but
before it descended the muzzle of my pistol was against his belly and
he must have seen in my eyes that nothing would suit me better than an
excuse to pull the trigger.  Like all his kind and all other bullies,
von Schoenvorts was a coward at heart, and so he dropped his hand to
his side and started to turn away; but I pulled him back, and there
before his men I told him that such a thing must never again
occur--that no man was to be struck or otherwise punished other than in
due process of the laws that we had made and the court that we had
established. All the time the sailor stood rigidly at attention, nor
could I tell from his expression whether he most resented the blow his
officer had struck him or my interference in the gospel of the
Kaiser-breed.  Nor did he move until I said to him:  "Plesser, you may
return to your quarters and dress your wound."  Then he saluted and
marched stiffly off toward the U-33.

Just before dusk we moved out into the bay a hundred yards from shore
and dropped anchor, for I felt that we should be safer there than
elsewhere.  I also detailed men to stand watch during the night and
appointed Olson officer of the watch for the entire night, telling him
to bring his blankets on deck and get what rest he could.  At dinner we
tasted our first roast Caprona antelope, and we had a mess of greens
that the cook had found growing along the stream.  All during the meal
von Schoenvorts was silent and surly.

After dinner we all went on deck and watched the unfamiliar scenes of a
Capronian night--that is, all but von Schoenvorts. There was less to
see than to hear.  From the great inland lake behind us came the
hissing and the screaming of countless saurians. Above us we heard the
flap of giant wings, while from the shore rose the multitudinous voices
of a tropical jungle--of a warm, damp atmosphere such as must have
enveloped the entire earth during the Palezoic and Mesozoic eras.  But
here were intermingled the voices of later eras--the scream of the
panther, the roar of the lion, the baying of wolves and a thunderous
growling which we could attribute to nothing earthly but which one day
we were to connect with the most fearsome of ancient creatures.

One by one the others went to their rooms, until the girl and I were
left alone together, for I had permitted the watch to go below for a
few minutes, knowing that I would be on deck. Miss La Rue was very
quiet, though she replied graciously enough to whatever I had to say
that required reply.  I asked her if she did not feel well.

"Yes," she said, "but I am depressed by the awfulness of it all. I feel
of so little consequence--so small and helpless in the face of all
these myriad manifestations of life stripped to the bone of its
savagery and brutality.  I realize as never before how cheap and
valueless a thing is life.  Life seems a joke, a cruel, grim joke.  You
are a laughable incident or a terrifying one as you happen to be less
powerful or more powerful than some other form of life which crosses
your path; but as a rule you are of no moment whatsoever to anything
but yourself.  You are a comic little figure, hopping from the cradle
to the grave.  Yes, that is our trouble--we take ourselves too
seriously; but Caprona should be a sure cure for that."  She paused and
laughed.

"You have evolved a beautiful philosophy," I said.  "It fills such a
longing in the human breast.  It is full, it is satisfying, it is
ennobling.  What wonderous strides toward perfection the human race
might have made if the first man had evolved it and it had persisted
until now as the creed of humanity."

"I don't like irony," she said; "it indicates a small soul."

"What other sort of soul, then, would you expect from `a comic little
figure hopping from the cradle to the grave'?" I inquired. "And what
difference does it make, anyway, what you like and what you don't like?
You are here for but an instant, and you mustn't take yourself too
seriously."

She looked up at me with a smile.  "I imagine that I am frightened and
blue," she said, "and I know that I am very, very homesick and lonely."
There was almost a sob in her voice as she concluded.  It was the first
time that she had spoken thus to me.  Involuntarily, I laid my hand
upon hers where it rested on the rail.

"I know how difficult your position is," I said; "but don't feel that
you are alone.  There is--is one here who--who would do anything in the
world for you," I ended lamely.  She did not withdraw her hand, and she
looked up into my face with tears on her cheeks and I read in her eyes
the thanks her lips could not voice. Then she looked away across the
weird moonlit landscape and sighed. Evidently her new-found philosophy
had tumbled about her ears, for she was seemingly taking herself
seriously.  I wanted to take her in my arms and tell her how I loved
her, and had taken her hand from the rail and started to draw her
toward me when Olson came blundering up on deck with his bedding.

The following morning we started building operations in earnest, and
things progressed finely.  The Neanderthal man was something of a care,
for we had to keep him in irons all the time, and he was mighty savage
when approached; but after a time he became more docile, and then we
tried to discover if he had a language. Lys spent a great deal of time
talking to him and trying to draw him out; but for a long while she was
unsuccessful.  It took us three weeks to build all the houses, which we
constructed close by a cold spring some two miles from the harbor.

We changed our plans a trifle when it came to building the palisade,
for we found a rotted cliff near by where we could get all the flat
building-stone we needed, and so we constructed a stone wall entirely
around the buildings.  It was in the form of a square, with bastions
and towers at each corner which would permit an enfilading fire along
any side of the fort, and was about one hundred and thirty-five feet
square on the outside, with walls three feet thick at the bottom and
about a foot and a half wide at the top, and fifteen feet high.  It
took a long time to build that wall, and we all turned in and helped
except von Schoenvorts, who, by the way, had not spoken to me except in
the line of official business since our encounter--a condition of armed
neutrality which suited me to a T.  We have just finished it, the last
touches being put on today.  I quit about a week ago and commenced
working on this chronicle for our strange adventures, which will
account for any minor errors in chronology which may have crept in;
there was so much material that I may have made some mistakes, but I
think they are but minor and few.

I see in reading over the last few pages that I neglected to state that
Lys finally discovered that the Neanderthal man possessed a language.
She had learned to speak it, and so have I, to some extent.  It was
he--his name he says is Am, or Ahm--who told us that this country is
called Caspak.  When we asked him how far it extended, he waved both
arms about his head in an all-including gesture which took in,
apparently, the entire universe. He is more tractable now, and we are
going to release him, for he has assured us that he will not permit his
fellows to harm us. He calls us Galus and says that in a short time he
will be a Galu. It is not quite clear to us what he means.  He says
that there are many Galus north of us, and that as soon as he becomes
one he will go and live with them.

Ahm went out to hunt with us yesterday and was much impressed by the
ease with which our rifles brought down antelopes and deer. We have
been living upon the fat of the land, Ahm, having shown us the edible
fruits, tubers and herbs, and twice a week we go out after fresh meat.
A certain proportion of this we dry and store away, for we do not know
what may come.  Our drying process is really smoking.  We have also
dried a large quantity of two varieties of cereal which grow wild a few
miles south of us. One of these is a giant Indian maize--a lofty
perennial often fifty and sixty feet in height, with ears the size off
a man's body and kernels as large as your fist.  We have had to
construct a second store house for the great quantity of this that we
have gathered.

September 3, 1916:  Three months ago today the torpedo from the U-33
started me from the peaceful deck of the American liner upon the
strange voyage which has ended here in Caspak.  We have settled down to
an acceptance of our fate, for all are convinced that none of us will
ever see the outer world again.  Ahm's repeated assertions that there
are human beings like ourselves in Caspak have roused the men to a keen
desire for exploration.  I sent out one party last week under Bradley.
Ahm, who is now free to go and come as he wishes, accompanied them.
They marched about twenty-five miles due west, encountering many
terrible beasts and reptiles and not a few manlike creatures whom Ahm
sent away.  Here is Bradley's report of the expedition:

Marched fifteen miles the first day, camping on the bank of a large
stream which runs southward.  Game was plentiful and we saw several
varieties which we had not before encountered in Caspak. Just before
making camp we were charged by an enormous woolly rhinoceros, which
Plesser dropped with a perfect shot.  We had rhinoceros-steaks for
supper.  Ahm called the thing "Atis."  It was almost a continuous
battle from the time we left the fort until we arrived at camp.  The
mind of man can scarce conceive the plethora of carnivorous life in
this lost world; and their prey, of course, is even more abundant.

The second day we marched about ten miles to the foot of the cliffs.
Passed through dense forests close to the base of the cliffs. Saw
manlike creatures and a low order of ape in one band, and some of the
men swore that there was a white man among them. They were inclined to
attack us at first; but a volley from our rifles caused them to change
their minds.  We scaled the cliffs as far as we could; but near the top
they are absolutely perpendicular without any sufficient cleft or
protuberance to give hand or foot-hold.  All were disappointed, for we
hungered for a view of the ocean and the outside world.  We even had a
hope that we might see and attract the attention of a passing ship. Our
exploration has determined one thing which will probably be of little
value to us and never heard of beyond Caprona's walls--this crater was
once entirely filled with water. Indisputable evidence of this is on
the face of the cliffs.

Our return journey occupied two days and was as filled with adventure
as usual.  We are all becoming accustomed to adventure. It is beginning
to pall on us.  We suffered no casualties and there was no illness.


I had to smile as I read Bradley's report.  In those four days he had
doubtless passed through more adventures than an African big-game
hunter experiences in a lifetime, and yet he covered it all in a few
lines.  Yes, we are becoming accustomed to adventure. Not a day passes
that one or more of us does not face death at least once.  Ahm taught
us a few things that have proved profitable and saved us much
ammunition, which it is useless to expend except for food or in the
last recourse of self-preservation. Now when we are attacked by large
flying reptiles we run beneath spreading trees; when land carnivora
threaten us, we climb into trees, and we have learned not to fire at
any of the dinosaurs unless we can keep out of their reach for at least
two minutes after hitting them in the brain or spine, or five minutes
after puncturing their hearts--it takes them so long to die. To hit
them elsewhere is worse than useless, for they do not seem to notice
it, and we had discovered that such shots do not kill or even disable
them.

September 7, 1916:  Much has happened since I last wrote.  Bradley is
away again on another exploration expedition to the cliffs.  He expects
to be gone several weeks and to follow along their base in search of a
point where they may be scaled.  He took Sinclair, Brady, James, and
Tippet with him.  Ahm has disappeared.  He has been gone about three
days; but the most startling thing I have on record is that von
Schoenvorts and Olson while out hunting the other day discovered oil
about fifteen miles north of us beyond the sandstone cliffs. Olson says
there is a geyser of oil there, and von Schoenvorts is making
preparations to refine it.  If he succeeds, we shall have the means for
leaving Caspak and returning to our own world. I can scarce believe the
truth of it.  We are all elated to the seventh heaven of bliss.  Pray
God we shall not be disappointed.

I have tried on several occasions to broach the subject of my love to
Lys; but she will not listen.



Chapter 7

October 8, 1916:  This is the last entry I shall make upon my
manuscript.  When this is done, I shall be through.  Though I may pray
that it reaches the haunts of civilized man, my better judgment tells
me that it will never be perused by other eyes than mine, and that even
though it should, it would be too late to avail me.  I am alone upon
the summit of the great cliff overlooking the broad Pacific.  A chill
south wind bites at my marrow, while far below me I can see the tropic
foliage of Caspak on the one hand and huge icebergs from the near
Antarctic upon the other.  Presently I shall stuff my folded manuscript
into the thermos bottle I have carried with me for the purpose since I
left the fort--Fort Dinosaur we named it--and hurl it far outward over
the cliff-top into the Pacific.  What current washes the shore of
Caprona I know not; whither my bottle will be borne I cannot even
guess; but I have done all that mortal man may do to notify the world
of my whereabouts and the dangers that threaten those of us who remain
alive in Caspak--if there be any other than myself.

About the 8th of September I accompanied Olson and von Schoenvorts to
the oil-geyser.  Lys came with us, and we took a number of things which
von Schoenvorts wanted for the purpose of erecting a crude refinery.
We went up the coast some ten or twelve miles in the U-33, tying up to
shore near the mouth of a small stream which emptied great volumes of
crude oil into the sea--I find it difficult to call this great lake by
any other name. Then we disembarked and went inland about five miles,
where we came upon a small lake entirely filled with oil, from the
center of which a geyser of oil spouted.

On the edge of the lake we helped von Schoenvorts build his primitive
refinery.  We worked with him for two days until he got things fairly
well started, and then we returned to Fort Dinosaur, as I feared that
Bradley might return and be worried by our absence. The U-33 merely
landed those of us that were to return to the fort and then retraced
its course toward the oil-well.  Olson, Whitely, Wilson, Miss La Rue,
and myself disembarked, while von Schoenvorts and his German crew
returned to refine the oil.  The next day Plesser and two other Germans
came down overland for ammunition. Plesser said they had been attacked
by wild men and had exhausted a great deal of ammunition.  He also
asked permission to get some dried meat and maize, saying that they
were so busy with the work of refining that they had no time to hunt.
I let him have everything he asked for, and never once did a suspicion
of their intentions enter my mind.  They returned to the oil-well the
same day, while we continued with the multitudinous duties of camp life.

For three days nothing of moment occurred.  Bradley did not return; nor
did we have any word from von Schoenvorts.  In the evening Lys and I
went up into one of the bastion towers and listened to the grim and
terrible nightlife of the frightful ages of the past.  Once a
saber-tooth screamed almost beneath us, and the girl shrank close
against me.  As I felt her body against mine, all the pent love of
these three long months shattered the bonds of timidity and conviction,
and I swept her up into my arms and covered her face and lips with
kisses.  She did not struggle to free herself; but instead her dear
arms crept up about my neck and drew my own face even closer to hers.

"You love me, Lys?" I cried.

I felt her head nod an affirmative against my breast.  "Tell me, Lys,"
I begged, "tell me in words how much you love me."

Low and sweet and tender came the answer:  "I love you beyond all
conception."

My heart filled with rapture then, and it fills now as it has each of
the countless times I have recalled those dear words, as it shall fill
always until death has claimed me.  I may never see her again; she may
not know how I love her--she may question, she may doubt; but always
true and steady, and warm with the fires of love my heart beats for the
girl who said that night:  "I love you beyond all conception."

For a long time we sat there upon the little bench constructed for the
sentry that we had not as yet thought it necessary to post in more than
one of the four towers.  We learned to know one another better in those
two brief hours than we had in all the months that had intervened since
we had been thrown together.  She told me that she had loved me from
the first, and that she never had loved von Schoenvorts, their
engagement having been arranged by her aunt for social reasons.

That was the happiest evening of my life; nor ever do I expect to
experience its like; but at last, as is the way of happiness, it
terminated.  We descended to the compound, and I walked with Lys to the
door of her quarters.  There again she kissed me and bade me good
night, and then she went in and closed the door.

I went to my own room, and there I sat by the light of one of the crude
candles we had made from the tallow of the beasts we had killed, and
lived over the events of the evening.  At last I turned in and fell
asleep, dreaming happy dreams and planning for the future, for even in
savage Caspak I was bound to make my girl safe and happy.  It was
daylight when I awoke.  Wilson, who was acting as cook, was up and
astir at his duties in the cook-house. The others slept; but I arose
and followed by Nobs went down to the stream for a plunge.  As was our
custom, I went armed with both rifle and revolver; but I stripped and
had my swim without further disturbance than the approach of a large
hyena, a number of which occupied caves in the sand-stone cliffs north
of the camp. These brutes are enormous and exceedingly ferocious.  I
imagine they correspond with the cave-hyena of prehistoric times. This
fellow charged Nobs, whose Capronian experiences had taught him that
discretion is the better part of valor--with the result that he dived
head foremost into the stream beside me after giving vent to a series
of ferocious growls which had no more effect upon Hyaena spelaeus than
might a sweet smile upon an enraged tusker. Afterward I shot the beast,
and Nobs had a feast while I dressed, for he had become quite a
raw-meat eater during our numerous hunting expeditions, upon which we
always gave him a portion of the kill.

Whitely and Olson were up and dressed when we returned, and we all sat
down to a good breakfast.  I could not but wonder at Lys' absence from
the table, for she had always been one of the earliest risers in camp;
so about nine o'clock, becoming apprehensive lest she might be
indisposed, I went to the door of her room and knocked.  I received no
response, though I finally pounded with all my strength; then I turned
the knob and entered, only to find that she was not there.  Her bed had
been occupied, and her clothing lay where she had placed it the
previous night upon retiring; but Lys was gone.  To say that I was
distracted with terror would be to put it mildly.  Though I knew she
could not be in camp, I searched every square inch of the compound and
all the buildings, yet without avail.

It was Whitely who discovered the first clue--a huge human-like
footprint in the soft earth beside the spring, and indications of a
struggle in the mud.

Then I found a tiny handkerchief close to the outer wall. Lys  had been
stolen!  It was all too plain.  Some hideous member of the ape-man
tribe had entered the fort and carried her off. While I stood stunned
and horrified at the frightful evidence before me, there came from the
direction of the great lake an increasing sound that rose to the volume
of a shriek.  We all looked up as the noise approached apparently just
above us, and a moment later there followed a terrific explosion which
hurled us to the ground.  When we clambered to our feet, we saw a large
section of the west wall torn and shattered.  It was Olson who first
recovered from his daze sufficiently to guess the explanation of the
phenomenon.

"A shell!" he cried.  "And there ain't no shells in Caspak besides
what's on the U-33.  The dirty boches are shellin' the fort.  Come on!"
And he grasped his rifle and started on a run toward the lake.  It was
over two miles, but we did not pause until the harbor was in view, and
still we could not see the lake because of the sandstone cliffs which
intervened.  We ran as fast as we could around the lower end of the
harbor, scrambled up the cliffs and at last stood upon their summit in
full view of the lake. Far away down the coast, toward the river
through which we had come to reach the lake, we saw upon the surface
the outline of the U-33, black smoke vomiting from her funnel.

Von Schoenvorts had succeeded in refining the oil!  The cur had broken
his every pledge and was leaving us there to our fates. He had even
shelled the fort as a parting compliment; nor could anything have been
more truly Prussian than this leave-taking of the Baron Friedrich von
Schoenvorts.

Olson, Whitely, Wilson, and I stood for a moment looking at one
another.  It seemed incredible that man could be so perfidious--that we
had really seen with our own eyes the thing that we had seen; but when
we returned to the fort, the shattered wall gave us ample evidence that
there was no mistake.

Then we began to speculate as to whether it had been an ape-man or a
Prussian that had abducted Lys.  From what we knew of von Schoenvorts,
we would not have been surprised at anything from him; but the
footprints by the spring seemed indisputable evidence that one of
Caprona's undeveloped men had borne off the girl I loved.

As soon as I had assured myself that such was the case, I made my
preparations to follow and rescue her.  Olson, Whitely, and Wilson each
wished to accompany me; but I told them that they were needed here,
since with Bradley's party still absent and the Germans gone it was
necessary that we conserve our force as far as might be possible.



Chapter 8

It was a sad leave-taking as in silence I shook hands with each of the
three remaining men.  Even poor Nobs appeared dejected as we quit the
compound and set out upon the well-marked spoor of the abductor.  Not
once did I turn my eyes backward toward Fort Dinosaur.  I have not
looked upon it since--nor in all likelihood shall I ever look upon it
again.  The trail led northwest until it reached the western end of the
sandstone cliffs to the north of the fort; there it ran into a
well-defined path which wound northward into a country we had not as
yet explored. It was a beautiful, gently rolling country, broken by
occasional outcroppings of sandstone and by patches of dense forest
relieved by open, park-like stretches and broad meadows whereon grazed
countless herbivorous animals--red deer, aurochs, and infinite variety
of antelope and at least three distinct species of horse, the latter
ranging in size from a creature about as large as Nobs to a magnificent
animal fourteen to sixteen hands high. These creatures fed together in
perfect amity; nor did they show any great indications of terror when
Nobs and I approached. They moved out of our way and kept their eyes
upon us until we had passed; then they resumed their feeding.

The path led straight across the clearing into another forest, lying
upon the verge of which I saw a bit of white.  It appeared to stand out
in marked contrast and incongruity to all its surroundings, and when I
stopped to examine it, I found that it was a small strip of
muslin--part of the hem of a garment. At once I was all excitement, for
I knew that it was a sign left by Lys that she had been carried this
way; it was a tiny bit torn from the hem of the undergarment that she
wore in lieu of the night-robes she had lost with the sinking of the
liner. Crushing the bit of fabric to my lips, I pressed on even more
rapidly than before, because I now knew that I was upon the right trail
and that up to this, point at least, Lys still had lived.

I made over twenty miles that day, for I was now hardened to fatigue
and accustomed to long hikes, having spent considerable time hunting
and exploring in the immediate vicinity of camp. A dozen times that day
was my life threatened by fearsome creatures of the earth or sky,
though I could not but note that the farther north I traveled, the
fewer were the great dinosaurs, though they still persisted in lesser
numbers.  On the other hand the quantity of ruminants and the variety
and frequency of carnivorous animals increased.  Each square mile of
Caspak harbored its terrors.

At intervals along the way I found bits of muslin, and often they
reassured me when otherwise I should have been doubtful of the trail to
take where two crossed or where there were forks, as occurred at
several points.  And so, as night was drawing on, I came to the
southern end of a line of cliffs loftier than any I had seen before,
and as I approached them, there was wafted to my nostrils the pungent
aroma of woodsmoke.  What could it mean? There could, to my mind, be
but a single solution: man abided close by, a higher order of man than
we had as yet seen, other than Ahm, the Neanderthal man. I wondered
again as I had so many times that day if it had not been Ahm who stole
Lys.

Cautiously I approached the flank of the cliffs, where they terminated
in an abrupt escarpment as though some all powerful hand had broken off
a great section of rock and set it upon the surface of the earth.  It
was now quite dark, and as I crept around the edge of the cliff, I saw
at a little distance a great fire around which were many
figures--apparently human figures. Cautioning Nobs to silence, and he
had learned many lessons in the value of obedience since we had entered
Caspak, I slunk forward, taking advantage of whatever cover I could
find, until from behind a bush I could distinctly see the creatures
assembled by the fire.  They were human and yet not human.  I should
say that they were a little higher in the scale of evolution than Ahm,
possibly occupying a place of evolution between that of the Neanderthal
man and what is known as the Grimaldi race.  Their features were
distinctly negroid, though their skins were white.  A considerable
portion of both torso and limbs were covered with short hair, and their
physical proportions were in many aspects apelike, though not so much
so as were Ahm's.  They carried themselves in a more erect position,
although their arms were considerably longer than those of the
Neanderthal man.  As I watched them, I saw that they possessed a
language, that they had knowledge of fire and that they carried besides
the wooden club of Ahm, a thing which resembled a crude stone hatchet.
Evidently they were very low in the scale of humanity, but they were a
step upward from those I had previously seen in Caspak.

But what interested me most was the slender figure of a dainty girl,
clad only in a thin bit of muslin which scarce covered her knees--a bit
of muslin torn and ragged about the lower hem.  It was Lys, and she was
alive and so far as I could see, unharmed.  A huge brute with thick
lips and prognathous jaw stood at her shoulder. He was talking loudly
and gesticulating wildly.  I was close enough to hear his words, which
were similar to the language of Ahm, though much fuller, for there were
many words I could not understand. However I caught the gist of what he
was saying--which in effect was that he had found and captured this
Galu, that she was his and that he defied anyone to question his right
of possession. It appeared to me, as I afterward learned was the fact,
that I was witnessing the most primitive of marriage ceremonies.  The
assembled members of the tribe looked on and listened in a sort of dull
and perfunctory apathy, for the speaker was by far the mightiest of the
clan.

There seemed no one to dispute his claims when he said, or rather
shouted, in stentorian tones:  "I am Tsa.  This is my she. Who wishes
her more than Tsa?"

"I do," I said in the language of Ahm, and I stepped out into the
firelight before them.  Lys gave a little cry of joy and started toward
me, but Tsa grasped her arm and dragged her back.

"Who are you?" shrieked Tsa.  "I kill!  I kill!  I kill!"

"The she is mine," I replied, "and I have come to claim her. I kill if
you do not let her come to me."  And I raised my pistol to a level with
his heart.  Of course the creature had no conception of the purpose of
the strange little implement which I was poking toward him.  With a
sound that was half human and half the growl of a wild beast, he sprang
toward me.  I aimed at his heart and fired, and as he sprawled headlong
to the ground, the others of his tribe, overcome by fright at the
report of the pistol, scattered toward the cliffs--while Lys, with
outstretched arms, ran toward me.

As I crushed her to me, there rose from the black night behind us and
then to our right and to our left a series of frightful screams and
shrieks, bellowings, roars and growls.  It was the night-life of this
jungle world coming into its own--the huge, carnivorous nocturnal
beasts which make the nights of Caspak hideous. A shuddering sob ran
through Lys' figure.  "O God," she cried, "give me the strength to
endure, for his sake!"  I saw that she was upon the verge of a
breakdown, after all that she must have passed through of fear and
horror that day, and I tried to quiet and reassure her as best I might;
but even to me the future looked most unpromising, for what chance of
life had we against the frightful hunters of the night who even now
were prowling closer to us?

Now I turned to see what had become of the tribe, and in the fitful
glare of the fire I perceived that the face of the cliff was pitted
with large holes into which the man-things were clambering.  "Come," I
said to Lys, "we must follow them. We cannot last a half-hour out here.
We must find a cave." Already we could see the blazing green eyes of
the hungry carnivora. I seized a brand from the fire and hurled it out
into the night, and there came back an answering chorus of savage and
rageful protest; but the eyes vanished for a short time.  Selecting a
burning branch for each of us, we advanced toward the cliffs, where we
were met by angry threats.

"They will kill us," said Lys.  "We may as well keep on in search of
another refuge."

"They will not kill us so surely as will those others out there," I
replied.  "I am going to seek shelter in one of these caves; nor will
the man-things prevent."  And I kept on in the direction of the cliff's
base.  A huge creature stood upon a ledge and brandished his stone
hatchet.  "Come and I will kill you and take the she," he boasted.

"You saw how Tsa fared when he would have kept my she," I replied in
his own tongue.  "Thus will you fare and all your fellows if you do not
permit us to come in peace among you out of the dangers of the night."

"Go north," he screamed.  "Go north among the Galus, and we will not
harm you.  Some day will we be Galus; but now we are not. You do not
belong among us.  Go away or we will kill you.  The she may remain if
she is afraid, and we will keep her; but the he must depart."

"The he won't depart," I replied, and approached still nearer. Rough
and narrow ledges formed by nature gave access to the upper caves.  A
man might scale them if unhampered and unhindered, but to clamber
upward in the face of a belligerent tribe of half-men and with a girl
to assist was beyond my capability.

"I do not fear you," screamed the creature.  "You were close to Tsa;
but I am far above you.  You cannot harm me as you harmed Tsa. Go away!"

I placed a foot upon the lowest ledge and clambered upward, reaching
down and pulling Lys to my side.  Already I felt safer. Soon we would
be out of danger of the beasts again closing in upon us. The man above
us raised his stone hatchet above his head and leaped lightly down to
meet us.  His position above me gave him a great advantage, or at least
so he probably thought, for he came with every show of confidence.  I
hated to do it, but there seemed no other way, and so I shot him down
as I had shot down Tsa.

"You see," I cried to his fellows, "that I can kill you wherever you
may be.  A long way off I can kill you as well as I can kill you near
by.  Let us come among you in peace.  I will not harm you if you do not
harm us.  We will take a cave high up.  Speak!"

"Come, then," said one.  "If you will not harm us, you may come. Take
Tsa's hole, which lies above you."

The creature showed us the mouth of a black cave, but he kept at a
distance while he did it, and Lys followed me as I crawled in to
explore.  I had matches with me, and in the light of one I found a
small cavern with a flat roof and floor which followed the cleavage of
the strata.  Pieces of the roof had fallen at some long-distant date,
as was evidenced by the depth of the filth and rubble in which they
were embedded.  Even a superficial examination revealed the fact that
nothing had ever been attempted that might have improved the livability
of the cavern; nor, should I judge, had it ever been cleaned out.  With
considerable difficulty I loosened some of the larger pieces of broken
rock which littered the floor and placed them as a barrier before the
doorway. It was too dark to do more than this.  I then gave Lys a piece
of dried meat, and sitting inside the entrance, we dined as must have
some of our ancient forbears at the dawning of the age of man, while
far below the open diapason of the savage night rose weird and
horrifying to our ears.  In the light of the great fire still burning
we could see huge, skulking forms, and in the blacker background
countless flaming eyes.

Lys shuddered, and I put my arm around her and drew her to me; and thus
we sat throughout the hot night.  She told me of her abduction and of
the fright she had undergone, and together we thanked God that she had
come through unharmed, because the great brute had dared not pause
along the danger-infested way.  She said that they had but just reached
the cliffs when I arrived, for on several occasions her captor had been
forced to take to the trees with her to escape the clutches of some
hungry cave-lion or saber-toothed tiger, and that twice they had been
obliged to remain for considerable periods before the beasts had
retired.

Nobs, by dint of much scrambling and one or two narrow escapes from
death, had managed to follow us up the cliff and was now curled between
me and the doorway, having devoured a piece of the dried meat, which he
seemed to relish immensely.  He was the first to fall asleep; but I
imagine we must have followed suit soon, for we were both tired.  I had
laid aside my ammunition-belt and rifle, though both were close beside
me; but my pistol I kept in my lap beneath my hand.  However, we were
not disturbed during the night, and when I awoke, the sun was shining
on the tree-tops in the distance.  Lys' head had drooped to my breast,
and my arm was still about her.

Shortly afterward Lys awoke, and for a moment she could not seem to
comprehend her situation.  She looked at me and then turned and glanced
at my arm about her, and then she seemed quite suddenly to realize the
scantiness of her apparel and drew away, covering her face with her
palms and blushing furiously.  I drew her back toward me and kissed
her, and then she threw her arms about my neck and wept softly in mute
surrender to the inevitable.

It was an hour later before the tribe began to stir about. We watched
them from our "apartment," as Lys called it. Neither men nor women wore
any sort of clothing or ornaments, and they all seemed to be about of
an age; nor were there any babies or children among them.  This was, to
us, the strangest and most inexplicable of facts, but it recalled to us
that though we had seen many of the lesser developed wild people of
Caspak, we had never yet seen a child or an old man or woman.

After a while they became less suspicious of us and then quite friendly
in their brutish way.  They picked at the fabric of our clothing, which
seemed to interest them, and examined my rifle and pistol and the
ammunition in the belt around my waist. I showed them the
thermos-bottle, and when I poured a little water from it, they were
delighted, thinking that it was a spring which I carried about with
me--a never-failing source of water supply.

One thing we both noticed among their other characteristics: they never
laughed nor smiled; and then we remembered that Ahm had never done so,
either.  I asked them if they knew Ahm; but they said they did not.

One of them said:  "Back there we may have known him."  And he jerked
his head to the south.

"You came from back there?"  I asked.  He looked at me in surprise.

"We all come from there," he said.  "After a while we go there." And
this time he jerked his head toward the north.  "Be Galus," he
concluded.

Many times now had we heard this reference to becoming Galus. Ahm had
spoken of it many times.  Lys and I decided that it was a sort of
original religious conviction, as much a part of them as their instinct
for self-preservation--a primal acceptance of a hereafter and a holier
state.  It was a brilliant theory, but it was all wrong.  I know it
now, and how far we were from guessing the wonderful, the miraculous,
the gigantic truth which even yet I may only guess at--the thing that
sets Caspak apart from all the rest of the world far more definitely
than her isolated geographical position or her impregnable barrier of
giant cliffs.  If I could live to return to civilization, I should have
meat for the clergy and the layman to chew upon for years--and for the
evolutionists, too.

After breakfast the men set out to hunt, while the women went to a
large pool of warm water covered with a green scum and filled with
billions of tadpoles.  They waded in to where the water was about a
foot deep and lay down in the mud.  They remained there from one to two
hours and then returned to the cliff.  While we were with them, we saw
this same thing repeated every morning; but though we asked them why
they did it we could get no reply which was intelligible to us.  All
they vouchsafed in way of explanation was the single word Ata.  They
tried to get Lys to go in with them and could not understand why she
refused.  After the first day I went hunting with the men, leaving my
pistol and Nobs with Lys, but she never had to use them, for no reptile
or beast ever approached the pool while the women were there--nor, so
far as we know, at other times.  There was no spoor of wild beast in
the soft mud along the banks, and the water certainly didn't look fit
to drink.

This tribe lived largely upon the smaller animals which they bowled
over with their stone hatchets after making a wide circle about their
quarry and driving it so that it had to pass close to one of their
number.  The little horses and the smaller antelope they secured in
sufficient numbers to support life, and they also ate numerous
varieties of fruits and vegetables.  They never brought in more than
sufficient food for their immediate needs; but why bother?  The food
problem of Caspak is not one to cause worry to her inhabitants.

The fourth day Lys told me that she thought she felt equal to
attempting the return journey on the morrow, and so I set out for the
hunt in high spirits, for I was anxious to return to the fort and learn
if Bradley and his party had returned and what had been the result of
his expedition.  I also wanted to relieve their minds as to Lys and
myself, as I knew that they must have already given us up for dead.  It
was a cloudy day, though warm, as it always is in Caspak.  It seemed
odd to realize that just a few miles away winter lay upon the
storm-tossed ocean, and that snow might be falling all about Caprona;
but no snow could ever penetrate the damp, hot atmosphere of the great
crater.

We had to go quite a bit farther than usual before we could surround a
little bunch of antelope, and as I was helping drive them, I saw a fine
red deer a couple of hundred yards behind me. He must have been asleep
in the long grass, for I saw him rise and look about him in a
bewildered way, and then I raised my gun and let him have it.  He
dropped, and I ran forward to finish him with the long thin knife,
which one of the men had given me; but just as I reached him, he
staggered to his feet and ran on for another two hundred yards--when I
dropped him again.  Once more was this repeated before I was able to
reach him and cut his throat; then I looked around for my companions,
as I wanted them to come and carry the meat home; but I could see
nothing of them. I called a few times and waited, but there was no
response and no one came.  At last I became disgusted, and cutting off
all the meat that I could conveniently carry, I set off in the
direction of the cliffs.  I must have gone about a mile before the
truth dawn upon me--I was lost, hopelessly lost.

The entire sky was still completely blotted out by dense clouds; nor
was there any landmark visible by which I might have taken my bearings.
I went on in the direction I thought was south but which I now imagine
must have been about due north, without detecting a single familiar
object.  In a dense wood I suddenly stumbled upon a thing which at
first filled me with hope and later with the most utter despair and
dejection.  It was a little mound of new-turned earth sprinkled with
flowers long since withered, and at one end was a flat slab of
sandstone stuck in the ground. It was a grave, and it meant for me that
I had at last stumbled into a country inhabited by human beings.  I
would find them; they would direct me to the cliffs; perhaps they would
accompany me and take us back with them to their abodes--to the abodes
of men and women like ourselves.  My hopes and my imagination ran riot
in the few yards I had to cover to reach that lonely grave and stoop
that I might read the rude characters scratched upon the simple
headstone.  This is what I read:

  HERE LIES JOHN TIPPET ENGLISHMAN KILLED BY TYRANNOSAURUS
  10 SEPT., A.D. 1916
  R. I. P.


Tippet! It seemed incredible.  Tippet lying here in this gloomy wood!
Tippet dead!  He had been a good man, but the personal loss was not
what affected me.  It was the fact that this silent grave gave evidence
that Bradley had come this far upon his expedition and that he too
probably was lost, for it was not our intention that he should be long
gone.  If I had stumbled upon the grave of one of the party, was it not
within reason to believe that the bones of the others lay scattered
somewhere near?



Chapter 9

As I stood looking down upon that sad and lonely mound, wrapped in the
most dismal of reflections and premonitions, I was suddenly seized from
behind and thrown to earth.  As I fell, a warm body fell on top of me,
and hands grasped my arms and legs. When I could look up, I saw a
number of giant fingers pinioning me down, while others stood about
surveying me.  Here again was a new type of man--a higher type than the
primitive tribe I had just quitted.  They were a taller people, too,
with better-shaped skulls and more intelligent faces.  There were less
of the ape characteristics about their features, and less of the
negroid, too. They carried weapons, stone-shod spears, stone knives,
and hatchets--and they wore ornaments and breech-cloths--the former of
feathers worn in their hair and the latter made of a single snake-skin
cured with the head on, the head depending to their knees.

Of course I did not take in all these details upon the instant of my
capture, for I was busy with other matters.  Three of the warriors were
sitting upon me, trying to hold me down by main strength and
awkwardness, and they were having their hands full in the doing, I can
tell you.  I don't like to appear conceited, but I may as well admit
that I am proud of my strength and the science that I have acquired and
developed in the directing of it--that and my horsemanship I always
have been proud of.  And now, that day, all the long hours that I had
put into careful study, practice and training brought me in two or
three minutes a full return upon my investment.  Californians, as a
rule, are familiar with ju-jutsu, and I especially had made a study of
it for several years, both at school and in the gym of the Los Angeles
Athletic Club, while recently I had had, in my employ, a Jap who was a
wonder at the art.

It took me just about thirty seconds to break the elbow of one of my
assailants, trip another and send him stumbling backward among his
fellows, and throw the third completely over my head in such a way that
when he fell his neck was broken.  In the instant that the others of
the party stood in mute and inactive surprise, I unslung my
rifle--which, carelessly, I had been carrying across my back; and when
they charged, as I felt they would, I put a bullet in the forehead of
one of them.  This stopped them all temporarily--not the death of their
fellow, but the report of the rifle, the first they had ever heard.
Before they were ready to attack me again, one of them spoke in a
commanding tone to his fellows, and in a language similar but still
more comprehensive than that of the tribe to the south, as theirs was
more complete than Ahm's.  He commanded them to stand back and then he
advanced and addressed me.

He asked me who I was, from whence I came and what my intentions were.
I replied that I was a stranger in Caspak, that I was lost and that my
only desire was to find my way back to my companions.  He asked where
they were and I told him toward the south somewhere, using the
Caspakian phrase which, literally translated, means "toward the
beginning."  His surprise showed upon his face before he voiced it in
words.  "There are no Galus there," he said.

"I tell you," I said angrily, "that I am from another country, far from
Caspak, far beyond the high cliffs.  I do not know who the Galus may
be; I have never seen them.  This is the farthest north I have been.
Look at me--look at my clothing and my weapons. Have you ever seen a
Galu or any other creature in Caspak who possessed such things?"

He had to admit that he had not, and also that he was much interested
in me, my rifle and the way I had handled his three warriors.  Finally
he became half convinced that I was telling him the truth and offered
to aid me if I would show him how I had thrown the man over my head and
also make him a present of the "bang-spear," as he called it.  I
refused to give him my rifle, but promised to show him the trick he
wished to learn if he would guide me in the right direction.  He told
me that he would do so tomorrow, that it was too late today and that I
might come to their village and spend the night with them.  I was loath
to lose so much time; but the fellow was obdurate, and so I accompanied
them.  The two dead men they left where they had fallen, nor gave them
a second glance--thus cheap is life upon Caspak.

These people also were cave-dwellers, but their caves showed the result
of a higher intelligence that brought them a step nearer to civilized
man than the tribe next "toward the beginning." The interiors of their
caverns were cleared of rubbish, though still far from clean, and they
had pallets of dried grasses covered with the skins of leopard, lynx,
and bear, while before the entrances were barriers of stone and small,
rudely circular stone ovens.  The walls of the cavern to which I was
conducted were covered with drawings scratched upon the sandstone.
There were the outlines of the giant red-deer, of mammoths, of tigers
and other beasts.  Here, as in the last tribe, there were no children
or any old people.  The men of this tribe had two names, or rather
names of two syllables, and their language contained words of two
syllables; whereas in the tribe of Tsa the words were all of a single
syllable, with the exception of a very few like Atis and Galus.  The
chief's name was To-jo, and his household consisted of seven females
and himself.  These women were much more comely, or rather less hideous
than those of Tsa's people; one of them, even, was almost pretty, being
less hairy and having a rather nice skin, with high coloring.

They were all much interested in me and examined my clothing and
equipment carefully, handling and feeling and smelling of each article.
I learned from them that their people were known as Bandlu, or
spear-men; Tsa's race was called Sto-lu--hatchet-men.  Below these in
the scale of evolution came the Bo-lu, or club-men, and then the Alus,
who had no weapons and no language.  In that word I recognized what to
me seemed the most remarkable discovery I had made upon Caprona, for
unless it were mere coincidence, I had come upon a word that had been
handed down from the beginning of spoken language upon earth, been
handed down for millions of years, perhaps, with little change.  It was
the sole remaining thread of the ancient woof of a dawning culture
which had been woven when Caprona was a fiery mount upon a great
land-mass teeming with life.  It linked the unfathomable then to the
eternal now.  And yet it may have been pure coincidence; my better
judgment tells me that it is coincidence that in Caspak the term for
speechless man is Alus, and in the outer world of our own day it is
Alalus.

The comely woman of whom I spoke was called So-ta, and she took such a
lively interest in me that To-jo finally objected to her attentions,
emphasizing his displeasure by knocking her down and kicking her into a
corner of the cavern.  I leaped between them while he was still kicking
her, and obtaining a quick hold upon him, dragged him screaming with
pain from the cave.  Then I made him promise not to hurt the she again,
upon pain of worse punishment. So-ta gave me a grateful look; but To-jo
and the balance of his women were sullen and ominous.

Later in the evening So-ta confided to me that she was soon to leave
the tribe.

"So-ta soon to be Kro-lu," she confided in a low whisper.  I asked her
what a Kro-lu might be, and she tried to explain, but I do not yet know
if I understood her.  From her gestures I deduced that the Kro-lus were
a people who were armed with bows and arrows, had vessels in which to
cook their food and huts of some sort in which they lived, and were
accompanied by animals.  It was all very fragmentary and vague, but the
idea seemed to be that the Kro-lus were a more advanced people than the
Band-lus.  I pondered a long time upon all that I had heard, before
sleep came to me.  I tried to find some connection between these
various races that would explain the universal hope which each of them
harbored that some day they would become Galus.  So-ta had given me a
suggestion; but the resulting idea was so weird that I could scarce
even entertain it; yet it coincided with Ahm's expressed hope, with the
various steps in evolution I had noted in the several tribes I had
encountered and with the range of type represented in each tribe.  For
example, among the Band-lu were such types as So-ta, who seemed to me
to be the highest in the scale of evolution, and To-jo, who was just a
shade nearer the ape, while there were others who had flatter noses,
more prognathous faces and hairier bodies.  The question puzzled me.
Possibly in the outer world the answer to it is locked in the bosom of
the Sphinx.  Who knows?  I do not.

Thinking the thoughts of a lunatic or a dope-fiend, I fell asleep; and
when I awoke, my hands and feet were securely tied and my weapons had
been taken from me.  How they did it without awakening me I cannot tell
you.  It was humiliating, but it was true. To-jo stood above me.  The
early light of morning was dimly filtering into the cave.

"Tell me," he demanded, "how to throw a man over my head and break his
neck, for I am going to kill you, and I wish to know this thing before
you die."

Of all the ingenuous declarations I have ever heard, this one copped
the proverbial bun.  It struck me as so funny that, even in the face of
death, I laughed.  Death, I may remark here, had, however, lost much of
his terror for me.  I had become a disciple of Lys' fleeting philosophy
of the valuelessness of human life. I realized that she was quite
right--that we were but comic figures hopping from the cradle to the
grave, of interest to practically no other created thing than ourselves
and our few intimates.

Behind To-jo stood So-ta.  She raised one hand with the palm toward
me--the Caspakian equivalent of a negative shake of the head.

"Let me think about it," I parried, and To-jo said that he would wait
until night.  He would give me a day to think it over; then he left,
and the women left--the men for the hunt, and the women, as I later
learned from So-ta, for the warm pool where they immersed their bodies
as did the shes of the Sto-lu.  "Ata," explained So-ta, when I
questioned her as to the purpose of this matutinal rite; but that was
later.

I must have lain there bound and uncomfortable for two or three hours
when at last So-ta entered the cave.  She carried a sharp knife--mine,
in fact, and with it she cut my bonds.

"Come!" she said.  "So-ta will go with you back to the Galus. It is
time that So-ta left the Band-lu.  Together we will go to the Kro-lu,
and after that the Galus.  To-jo will kill you tonight. He will kill
So-ta if he knows that So-ta aided you.  We will go together."

"I will go with you to the Kro-lu," I replied, "but then I must return
to my own people `toward the beginning.'"

"You cannot go back," she said.  "It is forbidden.  They would kill
you.  Thus far have you come--there is no returning."

"But I must return," I insisted.  "My people are there.  I must return
and lead them in this direction."

She insisted, and I insisted; but at last we compromised.  I was to
escort her as far as the country of the Kro-lu and then I was to go
back after my own people and lead them north into a land where the
dangers were fewer and the people less murderous. She brought me all my
belongings that had been filched from me--rifle, ammunition, knife, and
thermos bottle, and then hand in hand we descended the cliff and set
off toward the north.

For three days we continued upon our way, until we arrived outside a
village of thatched huts just at dusk.  So-ta said that she would enter
alone; I must not be seen if I did not intend to remain, as it was
forbidden that one should return and live after having advanced this
far.  So she left me. She was a dear girl and a stanch and true
comrade--more like a man than a woman.  In her simple barbaric way she
was both refined and chaste.  She had been the wife of To-jo.  Among
the Kro-lu she would find another mate after the manner of the strange
Caspakian world; but she told me very frankly that whenever I returned,
she would leave her mate and come to me, as she preferred me above all
others.  I was becoming a ladies' man after a lifetime of bashfulness!

At the outskirts of the village I left her without even seeing the sort
of people who inhabited it, and set off through the growing darkness
toward the south.  On the third day I made a detour westward to avoid
the country of the Band-lu, as I did not care to be detained by a
meeting with To-jo.  On the sixth day I came to the cliffs of the
Sto-lu, and my heart beat fast as I approached them, for here was Lys.
Soon I would hold her tight in my arms again; soon her warm lips would
merge with mine. I felt sure that she was still safe among the hatchet
people, and I was already picturing the joy and the love-light in her
eyes when she should see me once more as I emerged from the last clump
of trees and almost ran toward the cliffs.

It was late in the morning.  The women must have returned from the
pool; yet as I drew near, I saw no sign of life whatever. "They have
remained longer," I thought; but when I was quite close to the base of
the cliffs, I saw that which dashed my hopes and my happiness to earth.
Strewn along the ground were a score of mute and horrible suggestions
of what had taken place during my absence--bones picked clean of flesh,
the bones of manlike creatures, the bones of many of the tribe of
Sto-lu; nor in any cave was there sign of life.

Closely I examined the ghastly remains fearful each instant that I
should find the dainty skull that would shatter my happiness for life;
but though I searched diligently, picking up every one of the
twenty-odd skulls, I found none that was the skull of a creature but
slightly removed from the ape.  Hope, then, still lived.  For another
three days I searched north and south, east and west for the hatchetmen
of Caspak; but never a trace of them did I find.  It was raining most
of the time now, and the weather was as near cold as it ever seems to
get on Caprona.

At last I gave up the search and set off toward Fort Dinosaur. For a
week--a week filled with the terrors and dangers of a primeval world--I
pushed on in the direction I thought was south. The sun never shone;
the rain scarcely ever ceased falling. The beasts I met with were fewer
in number but infinitely more terrible in temper; yet I lived on until
there came to me the realization that I was hopelessly lost, that a
year of sunshine would not again give me my bearings; and while I was
cast down by this terrifying knowledge, the knowledge that I never
again could find Lys, I stumbled upon another grave--the grave of
William James, with its little crude headstone and its scrawled
characters recording that he had died upon the 13th of
September--killed by a saber-tooth tiger.

I think that I almost gave up then.  Never in my life have I felt more
hopeless or helpless or alone.  I was lost.  I could not find my
friends.  I did not even know that they still lived; in fact, I could
not bring myself to believe that they did.  I was sure that Lys was
dead.  I wanted myself to die, and yet I clung to life--useless and
hopeless and harrowing a thing as it had become. I clung to life
because some ancient, reptilian forbear had clung to life and
transmitted to me through the ages the most powerful motive that guided
his minute brain--the motive of self-preservation.

At last I came to the great barrier-cliffs; and after three days of mad
effort--of maniacal effort--I scaled them.  I built crude ladders; I
wedged sticks in narrow fissures; I chopped toe-holds and finger-holds
with my long knife; but at last I scaled them. Near the summit I came
upon a huge cavern.  It is the abode of some mighty winged creature of
the Triassic--or rather it was. Now it is mine.  I slew the thing and
took its abode.  I reached the summit and looked out upon the broad
gray terrible Pacific of the far-southern winter.  It was cold up
there.  It is cold here today; yet here I sit watching, watching,
watching for the thing I know will never come--for a sail.



Chapter 10

Once a day I descend to the base of the cliff and hunt, and fill my
stomach with water from a clear cold spring.  I have three gourds which
I fill with water and take back to my cave against the long nights.  I
have fashioned a spear and a bow and arrow, that I may conserve my
ammunition, which is running low.  My clothes are worn to shreds.
Tomorrow I shall discard them for leopard-skins which I have tanned and
sewn into a garment strong and warm.  It is cold up here.  I have a
fire burning and I sit bent over it while I write; but I am safe here.
No other living creature ventures to the chill summit of the barrier
cliffs.  I am safe, and I am alone with my sorrows and my remembered
joys--but without hope. It is said that hope springs eternal in the
human breast; but there is none in mine.

I am about done.  Presently I shall fold these pages and push them into
my thermos bottle.  I shall cork it and screw the cap tight, and then I
shall hurl it as far out into the sea as my strength will permit.  The
wind is off-shore; the tide is running out; perhaps it will be carried
into one of those numerous ocean-currents which sweep perpetually from
pole to pole and from continent to continent, to be deposited at last
upon some inhabited shore.  If fate is kind and this does happen, then,
for God's sake, come and get me!

It was a week ago that I wrote the preceding paragraph, which I thought
would end the written record of my life upon Caprona. I had paused to
put a new point on my quill and stir the crude ink (which I made by
crushing a black variety of berry and mixing it with water) before
attaching my signature, when faintly from the valley far below came an
unmistakable sound which brought me to my feet, trembling with
excitement, to peer eagerly downward from my dizzy ledge.  How full of
meaning that sound was to me you may guess when I tell you that it was
the report of a firearm!  For a moment my gaze traversed the landscape
beneath until it was caught and held by four figures near the base of
the cliff--a human figure held at bay by three hyaenodons, those
ferocious and blood-thirsty wild dogs of the Eocene.  A fourth beast
lay dead or dying near by.

I couldn't be sure, looking down from above as I was; but yet I
trembled like a leaf in the intuitive belief that it was Lys, and my
judgment served to confirm my wild desire, for whoever it was carried
only a pistol, and thus had Lys been armed.  The first wave of sudden
joy which surged through me was short-lived in the face of the
swift-following conviction that the one who fought below was already
doomed.  Luck and only luck it must have been which had permitted that
first shot to lay low one of the savage creatures, for even such a
heavy weapon as my pistol is entirely inadequate against even the
lesser carnivora of Caspak. In a moment the three would charge! A
futile shot would but tend more greatly to enrage the one it chanced to
hit; and then the three would drag down the little human figure and
tear it to pieces.

And maybe it was Lys!  My heart stood still at the thought, but mind
and muscle responded to the quick decision I was forced to make. There
was but a single hope--a single chance--and I took it. I raised my
rifle to my shoulder and took careful aim.  It was a long shot, a
dangerous shot, for unless one is accustomed to it, shooting from a
considerable altitude is most deceptive work. There is, though,
something about marksmanship which is quite beyond all scientific laws.

Upon no other theory can I explain my marksmanship of that moment.
Three times my rifle spoke--three quick, short syllables of death. I
did not take conscious aim; and yet at each report a beast crumpled in
its tracks!

From my ledge to the base of the cliff is a matter of several thousand
feet of dangerous climbing; yet I venture to say that the first ape
from whose loins my line has descended never could have equaled the
speed with which I literally dropped down the face of that rugged
escarpment.  The last two hundred feet is over a steep incline of loose
rubble to the valley bottom, and I had just reached the top of this
when there arose to my ears an agonized cry--"Bowen!  Bowen!  Quick, my
love, quick!"

I had been too much occupied with the dangers of the descent to glance
down toward the valley; but that cry which told me that it was indeed
Lys, and that she was again in danger, brought my eyes quickly upon her
in time to see a hairy, burly brute seize her and start off at a run
toward the near-by wood.  From rock to rock, chamoislike, I leaped
downward toward the valley, in pursuit of Lys and her hideous abductor.

He was heavier than I by many pounds, and so weighted by the burden he
carried that I easily overtook him; and at last he turned, snarling, to
face me.  It was Kho of the tribe of Tsa, the hatchet-men.  He
recognized me, and with a low growl he threw Lys aside and came for me.
"The she is mine," he cried. "I kill!  I kill!"

I had had to discard my rifle before I commenced the rapid descent of
the cliff, so that now I was armed only with a hunting knife, and this
I whipped from its scabbard as Kho leaped toward me. He was a mighty
beast, mightily muscled, and the urge that has made males fight since
the dawn of life on earth filled him with the blood-lust and the thirst
to slay; but not one whit less did it fill me with the same primal
passions.  Two abysmal beasts sprang at each other's throats that day
beneath the shadow of earth's oldest cliffs--the man of now and the
man-thing of the earliest, forgotten then, imbued by the same deathless
passion that has come down unchanged through all the epochs, periods
and eras of time from the beginning, and which shall continue to the
incalculable end--woman, the imperishable Alpha and Omega of life.

Kho closed and sought my jugular with his teeth.  He seemed to forget
the hatchet dangling by its aurochs-hide thong at his hip, as I forgot,
for the moment, the dagger in my hand.  And I doubt not but that Kho
would easily have bested me in an encounter of that sort had not Lys'
voice awakened within my momentarily reverted brain the skill and
cunning of reasoning man.

"Bowen!" she cried.  "Your knife!  Your knife!"

It was enough.  It recalled me from the forgotten eon to which my brain
had flown and left me once again a modern man battling with a clumsy,
unskilled brute.  No longer did my jaws snap at the hairy throat before
me; but instead my knife sought and found a space between two ribs over
the savage heart.  Kho voiced a single horrid scream, stiffened
spasmodically and sank to the earth. And Lys threw herself into my
arms.  All the fears and sorrows of the past were wiped away, and once
again I was the happiest of men.

With some misgivings I shortly afterward cast my eyes upward toward the
precarious ledge which ran before my cave, for it seemed to me quite
beyond all reason to expect a dainty modern belle to essay the perils
of that frightful climb.  I asked her if she thought she could brave
the ascent, and she laughed gayly in my face.

"Watch!" she cried, and ran eagerly toward the base of the cliff. Like
a squirrel she clambered swiftly aloft, so that I was forced to exert
myself to keep pace with her.  At first she frightened me; but
presently I was aware that she was quite as safe here as was I. When we
finally came to my ledge and I again held her in my arms, she recalled
to my mind that for several weeks she had been living the life of a
cave-girl with the tribe of hatchet-men.  They had been driven from
their former caves by another tribe which had slain many and carried
off quite half the females, and the new cliffs to which they had flown
had proven far higher and more precipitous, so that she had become,
through necessity, a most practiced climber.

She told me of Kho's desire for her, since all his females had been
stolen and of how her life had been a constant nightmare of terror as
she sought by night and by day to elude the great brute. For a time
Nobs had been all the protection she required; but one day he
disappeared--nor has she seen him since.  She believes that he was
deliberately made away with; and so do I, for we both are sure that he
never would have deserted her.  With her means of protection gone, Lys
was now at the mercy of the hatchet-man; nor was it many hours before
he had caught her at the base of the cliff and seized her; but as he
bore her triumphantly aloft toward his cave, she had managed to break
loose and escape him.

"For three days he has pursued me," she said, "through this horrible
world.  How I have passed through in safety I cannot guess, nor how I
have always managed to outdistance him; yet I have done it, until just
as you discovered me.  Fate was kind to us, Bowen."

I nodded my head in assent and crushed her to me. And then we talked
and planned as I cooked antelope-steaks over my fire, and we came to
the conclusion that there was no hope of rescue, that she and I were
doomed to live and die upon Caprona.  Well, it might be worse!  I would
rather live here always with Lys than to live elsewhere without her;
and she, dear girl, says the same of me; but I am afraid of this life
for her.  It is a hard, fierce, dangerous life, and I shall pray always
that we shall be rescued from it--for her sake.

That night the clouds broke, and the moon shone down upon our little
ledge; and there, hand in hand, we turned our faces toward heaven and
plighted our troth beneath the eyes of God.  No human agency could have
married us more sacredly than we are wed.  We are man and wife, and we
are content.  If God wills it, we shall live out our lives here.  If He
wills otherwise, then this manuscript which I shall now consign to the
inscrutable forces of the sea shall fall into friendly hands.  However,
we are each without hope. And so we say good-bye in this, our last
message to the world beyond the barrier cliffs.

(Signed) Bowen J. Tyler, Jr. Lys La R. Tyler.









End of Project Gutenberg's The Land That Time Forgot, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAND THAT TIME FORGOT ***

***** This file should be named 551.txt or 551.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/551/

Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
